Where does text reside? If you are reading this book in print, you can point to
the page and be fairly certain of the answer: here, on the page. If you are
reading the book on a *device*, things get more complicated. You can point to
the screen and yet it would not be enough to say that the text resides there.
The screen will go dark when the device loses power, but the text will
persevere within, stored at another physical location. Deep within a device,
the text lodges itself into some sort of a storage medium, usually a magnetic
or a "solid state" drive. I have before me at least two inscriptions: one as
circuit state on my hard drive, and another as crystal phase on the screen.
They denote the same idea, but in two distinct places. How did this duplicity
come to be? And what impact does it have on the life of a mind?

In this paper, I would like to give a historical account of a pixel's passage
from keystroke to pixel. The movement proceeds in three stages: first the
mechanization of type reaches its apogee in the typewriter and the telegraph at
the end of the nineteenth century. With the advent of telegraphy, "content"
meant for humans begins to intertwine with "control codes" meant for remote
machine operation. Where the ticker tape was still a human-legible medium, the
invention of the magnetic tape submerges the mixed stream of letters and
control codes into a medium that cannot be read withtout the aid of specialized
devices. The tape remains otherwise inscrutible. Finally, by the mid-twentieth
century the screen emerges to simulate a measure of lost legibility. However,
as note

the transition between "solid states" of the 

perform a close reading of three devices:
Together, they tell a story of what I will call the splintering of the sign.
The inscription, once a unitary thing firmly attached to paper, splinters into
at at least two parts: 

Once we encounter the book as a computational device, we must come to terms
with the simulated nature of screen textuality. Matter, form, and content lie
flat on the printed page. Print interfaces are paper thin, we might say. Ink
adheres to paper in the way that pixels do not to screens. The bifurcated sign
resides in two distinct locations, each entailing drastically differing
affordances for reading. This affects even those who prefer to read in print.
Like most literature today, print materials are also "born digital." At some
point of time, they occupy the same duplicitous position between storage medium
and pixel.

Thus when when Michael Heim refers to the "ephemeral quality" of the electronic
text or when Pamela McCorduck describes it as "impermanent, flimsy, malleable,
[and] contingent" they are both identifying real-world technological
affordances of simulated screen textuality [@mccorduck_universal_1985, 51;
@heim_electric_1987, 211]. McCorduck tells the story of a rabbinate court,
which, when faced with the law prohibiting observant Jews from erasing God's
name, rule that words on "screens, disks, and tapes" are not to be considered
as writing, therefore sanctioning erasure [@mccorduck_universal_1985, 51; also
quoted @heim_electric_1987, 192]. Other technological and legal fictions rise
to restore a measure of "stickiness" to electronic media. For example,
manufacturers commonly embed digital rights management circuits into video
streaming devices to artificially limit the duplication of broadcast material.
Similarly, electronic book sellers usually disable the reader's ability to copy
and paste from the material. Such measures mimic some of the constraints
associated with static, paper-and-ink media regimes.

When scholars like Johnna Drucker, Katherine Hayles, and Matthew Kirschenbaum
respond to Heim and company with hardened materialism, they are also rightly
identifying actual properties of electronic text. But the two camps speak
neither of the same phenomenon nor at the same site. The former group points to
the screen as the impermanent and ephemeral state of the written word: like
tomatoes suspended in aspic, writes Heim [@heim_electric_1987, ix]. The latter
points instead to the "uniquely indelible nature of magnetic storage"
[@kirschenbaum_mechanisms_2008], to "drives, tapes, and disks" as the
"fundamental physical support" and "material substrates of computing"
[@drucker_performative_2013]. Both locations, the screen and the disk, are
real. Neither can be reduced to the other. Both contain distinct constraints
and affordances for action.

The seeming immateriality of digital media entails real-world effects: the
costs of replication plummet, for example. Computational text can be copied
effortlessly, with minimal cost, and with near-perfect fidelity.
Hyper-reproducibility of the sort was unthinkable for most of the twentieth
century. The machine allows for rapid remediation. Lowered costs of copying
further reduce barriers to access and conveyance. Symbols that adhere lightly
to their medium are easy to store and to transport. Witness the rise of
massive, global public knowledge projects like online search engines and
encyclopedias as a direct consequence. Such projects unfold the logic of
immateriality, which moves towards totalizing archives and universal
accessibility.[^ln1-google] When representation appears to weigh nothing, one
imagines a weightless totality of all representation, available immediately and
everywhere. The perceived weightlessness of text has other side-effects as
well. For example, a text that adheres lightly to its medium is also difficult
to contain, making onerous the governance of symbolic representation and
weakening traditional controls like censorship and intellectual property
rights.

Yet, despite the appearances, the sign does not and cannot exist in a vacuum.
Rather, the symbol splits in two: with one half arising visibly, a weightless
and apparent screen simulation, and the other half, opaque, etched into the
hefty and hidden material contingencies of the device. The material substrates
of computational text likewise carry real-world affordances and consequences.
They are first and foremost hidden from view. Drives and tapes reside inside of
black or aluminum boxes. If only because they carry electrical current and have
the potential to catch fire, they are regulated. They contain heavy and rare
metals, often hazardous if touched or ingested. The computational part of the
sign is sealed in miniaturized containers that prevent access and to resist
tempering. These are but some of the realities of material text. It is text
intertwined with machine internals and control code and it is often
hermeneutically sealed to resist human interpretation.

Few readers today will be able to give an account of a pixel's passage from
keystroke to ink or pixel. The vast machinery that brings literature to life
hides from the reader's view. Literature conceals. Even on the level of
stylistics, writing well is meant to evoke a sense of ease where it is usually
the product of painstaking labor. Let us hold on to that intuition for the
duration of this chapter: writing conceals labor.

In answer, I offer the following three historical preconditions for digital
textuality. They are not meant as history, but rather as signposts to mark the
journey ahead. The schema proceeds roughly as follows: first, content and
control couple at the visible surface of removable storage media (ticker tape
and punch card); second, inscription splits into input and output, retreating
into magnetic storage to reemerge at last on the screen, in the same guise, but
also, as we suspect, somehow transformed: less solid and concealing something
beneath the phantasmal shell of its former appearance.[^ln1-denning]

As we embark to explore the consequences of simulated text, I propose we keep
the following three landmark mechanisms in view as signpost along our journey:
Goldberg's Controller, the IBM MT/ST, and Engelbart's Time Fob. In the first of
these, text structure and machine control lie before us for inspection. The
second one is mute: a black slate. The last of these belongs to what Peter
Denning calls the "third generation" of computer systems---an assemblage of
storage, input, and output technologies that continue to shape the contemporary
human encounter with text today. These devices tell us a story of a fracture.
Through them, a part of the sign fades from view as an arrangement of magnetic
charge and floating gate. Another part appears as flicker of the cathode ray
and the flow of the liquid crystal.

