# Right to Repair is Right to Interpret

How is a tractor like a writing desk?

There are some metaphorical niceties in the comparison between reading and
writing, reaping and sowing. Changes in technology that facilitates physical
contact between laborers and their element, be it a blank page or a fallow
field, should bring farmers and literary scholars into a more direct
conversation, concerning the nature of electronic goods.

In the digital world, neither plow nor pen are subject purely to their
mechanics. The modern tractor like the modern typewriter is also a computer,
which means, literally, that these tools now contain an inward facing surface,
marked by inscription. Solid state memory arrays are machined out of silicon,
ceramic, palladium, platinum, silver and other precious metals. They are tiny
storehouses for information---programming instructions---which ultimately
govern the behaviour of the mechanism. The presence of such a surface and the
capability to respond to its commands is what differentiates "smart" devices
from their lackwit counterparts. The smart device, to paraphrase Marx, is one
that evolves, out of its silicon brain, grotesque ideas. It is a thing imbued
with potential for symbolic manipulation.

It should not surprise us then that protections usually reserved for
intellectual property have been expanded to cover such tangible goods as
harvesters and combines. In her essay "Freedom to Tinker," Pamela Samuelson,
of Berkeley Law, described the now infamous attempt by John Deere, a major
international maker of agricultural machinery, to restrict access to the
innards of its machines, thus severely limiting its customers' ability to
repair their own equipment.[^1] Organizations such as the Electronic Frontier
Foundation and repair.org have mobilized politically, resulting in "right to
repair" bills adopted into law in at least 11 states, including New York and
Massachusetts.[^2]

These bills are important to me as a literary scholar, because the right to
repair implies, physically, the right to read, write, and interpret
inscription implicit in all smart devices, including those on our writing
desks. Like farmers, all those who read and write at a computer are faced with
a threat of critical disempowerment. The practice of literary hermeneutics,
the interpretation of texts, in all of its varied traditions, cannot take
place when access to inscription is physically curtailed. Think of it as an
ultimate form of political censorship, not by decree, but by material design.
The solid state drive is sealed hermetically and therefore hermeneutically.
What one sees at the surface of a screen is a part of a more complex, laminate
figure which extends across surfaces: some near to the reader and other
remote, inches and sometimes continents away from the site of interpretation.
The electronic book in my palm has its origins on servers in Ohio, Northern
Virginia, Mumbai, and São Paulo.[^3]

"Literary analysis should awaken to the importance of media-specific analysis,
a mode of critical attention which recognizes that all texts are instantiated
and that the nature of the medium in which they are instantiated matters,"
N. Katherine Hayles wrote in *Poetics Today* more than a decade ago.[^3] These
   words, along with other pioneering works by materially-minded textual
scholars such as Johanna Drucker, Jerome McGann, and Matthew Kirschenbaum,
have motivated my approach to writing *Plain Text: The Poetics of Computation*
(Stanford UP, 2017). What are the media specifics of text instantiated on
digital screens? In answering that question, I have relied on a number of
archival sources that point to an intellectual legacy shared between the
history of literary thought and the history of modern computing. In this way,
I show that the very idea of a Turing machine, at the center of algorithmic,
owes its origins to a series of thought experiments about the nature of
interpretation in the work of Ludwig Wittgenstein. Elsewhere, I discuss the
influence of metaphor theory in the thought of influential user interface.

In one chapter, I show that the
genealogy of Turing machines, the blueprint of all hypothetical computers, has
its roots in the 

Our collective alienation from the immediate material contexts of inscription
is less obvious but no less palpable than the plight of other tinkerers.

We should be united in our insistence on keeping power structures 

[^1]: Samuelson, Pamela. “Freedom to Tinker.” Theoretical Inquiries in Law 17, no. 2 (2016): 562–600.

[^2]: https://web.archive.org/web/20170614215039/https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/12/john-deere-really-doesnt-want-you-own-tractor

[^3]: Hayles, N. Katherine. “Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The Importance of Media-Specific Analysis.” Poetics Today 25, no. 1 (March 20, 2004): 67–90.

[^4]: Recent important contributions to critical infrastructure studies
include Starosielski, Nicole. *The Undersea Network*. Durham: Duke University
Press Books, 2015 and Hu, Tung-Hui. A Prehistory of the Cloud. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015 and Hu, Tung-Hui. *A Prehistory of the
Cloud*. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015.




