This book challenges the ways we read, write, store, and retrieve information
in the digital age. Given how much emergent thought-things—from electronic
books to smart phone—participate actively in the production of meaning, we
must attend to the subtle theoretical and political commitments our
technological choices entail. Dennis Tenen takes up today's strange enmeshing
of humans, texts, and machines to argue that our most ingrained intuitions
about texts are profoundly alienated from the physical contexts of their
intellectual production. Drawing on a range of primary sources from both
literary theory and software engineering, he uncovers their shared history to
make a case for human readable input and output, for simple and elegant
computational tools, and for open systems that are transparent to the user.
<i>Plain Text</i> is thus a rallying call, a frame of mind as much as a file
format. Bringing computation closer to its humanistic roots, and the
humanities closer to its computational realities, it reminds us that our
devices, which increasingly mediate literary activity, encode specific modes
of governance and control."

This book challenges the ways we read, write, store, and retrieve information
in the digital age. Computers---electronic books and smart phones---interject
actively in our social lives. Our technological choices thus entail ethical
and ultimately political commitments. Dennis Tenen takes up today's strange
enmeshing of humans, signs, and machines to argue that our most ingrained
intuitions about texts are profoundly alienated from the physical contexts of
their intellectual production. Drawing on a rich historical archive from both
literary theory and software engineering, he makes a case for a more empowered
practice of human-computer interaction. <i>Plain Text</i> is thus a rallying
call, a frame of mind as much as a file format. Bringing computation closer to
its humanistic roots and the humanities closer to its computational realities,
it reminds us that our devices also encode specific modes of governance and
control, which must remain available to view and interpretation.

This book challenges the ways we read, write, store, and retrieve information in the digital age. Computers—from electronic books to smart phones—play an active role in our social lives. Our technological choices thus entail theoretical and political commitments. Dennis Tenen takes up today's strange enmeshing of humans, texts, and machines to argue that our most ingrained intuitions about texts are profoundly alienated from the physical contexts of their intellectual production. Drawing on a range of primary sources from both literary theory and software engineering, he makes a case for a more transparent practice of human-computer interaction. <i>Plain Text</i> is thus a rallying call, a frame of mind as much as a file format. It reminds us, ultimately, that our devices also encode specific modes of governance and control that must remain available to interpretation.
