# Acknowledgments

The book's faults, to quote Will Durant, are all mine. Its strengths, however,
derive from the support of a community.

The project could not have been possible without the generous support of
Harvard's Comparative Literature department. Its publication was subsidized in
part by Harvard Studies in Comparative Literature. Initial sketches of the
book appeared in conversation with Aleksey Berg, Jacob Emory, Elena Fratto,
Natalia and Ilya Kun, Anders Engberg-Pedersen, Guy Smoot, Simos Zeniou, and
many others who made Dana-Palmer House their home away from home. Readers will
recognize the influence of Svetlana Boym, Peter Gallison, Richard Moran,
Elaine Scarry, William Todd, and Roberto Mangabeira Unger. Their thought was
formative in the manuscript's early stages.

A fellowship from the Berkman Center for Internet and Society gave me the time
and means to develop a deep research archive. I would like to thank Yochai
Benkler, Urs Gasser, John Palfrey, Rebecca Tabasky, Jonathan Zittrain, and
especially Jeffery Schnapp for their support. Members of the Cooperation Group
in particular had a profound, if not an obvious, intellectual impact on my
work. Echoes of discussions with Mayo Fuster, Jerome Hergueux, Benjamin Mako
Hill, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, and Aaron Shaw will be found on the pages of
every chapter.

The book came to fruition at Columbia University. Junior colleagues Ratik
Asokan, Emily Fuhrman, Jessica Hallock, Tobias Pester, Phil Polefrone, and
Zachary Roberts helped gave line edits and insightful feedback. Senior
colleagues Sarah Cole, Nick Dames, Michael Golston, Stathis Gourgouris,
Marianne Hirsch, Jean Howard, Matt Jones, Sharon Marcus, Edward Mendelson,
Frances Negrón-Muntaner, Bruce Robbins, and Gayatri Spivak had a hand in
individual chapters. The book became stronger with their guidance. Kaiama
Glover, Marguerite Holloway, Bernard Harcourt, Matt Hart, Lydia Liu, Anupama
Rao, Jesús R. Velasco, and Bill Worthen offered valuable advice. Columbia's
Comparative Media university seminar provided an important forum for several
of the book's chapters, involving Stefan Andriopoulos, Noam Elcott, Brian
Larkin, Reinhold Martin, Rosalind C. Morris, and Felicity Scott, among others.
Columbia University Summer Grant Program in the Humanities and the Lenfest
Junior Faculty Development Grant supported the concluding stages of manuscript
preparation. Weekly meetings with members of the Experimental Methods
Group---Alex Gil, Susanna Allés Torrent, Grant Wythoff, and others---grounded
my thought in practice, among many inspiring projects.

Manan Ahmed and Durba Mitra, both members of our co-presence writing group,
deserve a special mention and my heartfelt gratitude. The last year-and-a-half
of the book's development happened in almost daily communication with them.
Ahmed's *A Book of Conquest: The Chachnama and Muslim Origins in South Asia*
forthcoming from Harvard University Press and Mitra's "Indian Sex Life: Women
and the New Science of Society" were at various stages of development at the
same time. Their warmth, humor, and intelligence brightened every page.

Matt Gold of CUNY and Jentery Sayers at University of Victoria both assigned
early drafts of individual chapters. The experience was immensely helpful in
imagining my audience. Siddhartha Lokanandi and Ann Kay line edited
extensively. Barbara Herrnstein Smith and Johanna Drucker advised on
individual chapters. Raja Adal, Janet Vertesi, and Susan Zieger were some of
the most insightful public respondents to text on the conference circuit.

Emily-Jane Cohen and her team at Stanford University Press expertly guided the
book to publication. I received careful consideration and comments from
Matthew Fuller, Ray Siemens, and two other anonymous reviewers. I would like
to thank Micah Siegel, Marthine Desiree Satris, COPYEDITOR NAME HERE, and INDEXER
NAME HERE for their patience, hard work, and attention to detail.

Finally, a book extracts its heaviest toll from those closest to the author.
My family and my partner Yoora gave it the needed time, space, and love.
