---
title: "Plain Text: The Poetics of Human-Computer Interaction (Sample Chapters)"
subtitle: "Chapter 1: Literature Down to the Pixel"
author: "Dennis Tenen"
style: csl/chicago-note.csl
bibliography: plain-text.bib
toc: true
documentclass: article
cover-image: images/steno.png
header-includes:
- \usepackage{ftnxtra}
- \usepackage{titlesec}
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \newcommand{\sectionbreak}{\clearpage}
- \rhead{DRAFT | do not circulate }
- \lhead{}

---

# Chapter 1: Laying Bare the Device

As I write these words, a ceiling-mounted smoke detector in my kitchen emits a
loud noise every three minutes or so. And at every 15 minutes, a pleasant
female voice announces also "low battery." These precautions are stipulated by
US National Fire Alarm Code 72-108 11.6.6 (2013). The clause requiring a
"distinct audible signal before the battery is incapable of operating" is not
only required by law, it is *built into the device*. The device internalizes
legislation in its programming. We obtain the condition where the two meanings
of code---as governance and program instruction---coincide. Code equals code.

I am not at home. But I know the alarm is happening because I receive
notifications of it on another small computational device, next to my laptop.
This device also contains most of my library. Despite the appearances, the
electronic book on my desk has more in common with the smoke detector than it
does with several paper volumes also scattered across my desk. Both devices
embody printed circuit boards, capacitors, silicone chips, and resistors. Both
draw electric current. Both require firmware updates. Both are governed by
codes political and computational. Both are connected to the network and both
communicate: with remote data centers and with each other. And yet, I continue
to read electronic books as if they were familiar, immutable, and passive
objects: just books. I think of them as intimate artifacts, friends even,
wholly known to me, comforting, and benign. The literary device is none of
these things. It records my reading, sleeping, and consumption habits. It
reconfigures itself and "my" texts dynamically. It comes with a manual and
terms of service. In short, it *governs* reading.

In this book, we will encounter the digital literary artifact anew, discovering
its possibilities as a device. We will imagine a hermeneutics capable of
comprehending the emerging contingencies of literary computation. Finally, in
*Plain Text*, I will argue for the preservation of human agency in the many
everyday acts of human--computer interaction.

The purpose of this chapter is to locate the object of literary study. I mean
"object" literally, as a material thing that can be seen and touched. This is
not a trivial task when it comes to digital literary artifacts. Device reading
happens on screens that refresh themselves at a rate of around 60 cycles per
second (Hertz). Screen textuality is therefore by definition ephemeral. It
moves even as it appears to stand still. We will have to dig deeper to find the
text in the machine. Furthermore, the search for the literary artifact entails
finding spaces of computational literary activity. Literary devices are those
machines that in themselves constitute a system for textual diffusion. They
facilitate symbolic exchange and they do so in diverse textual ecosystems. The
ecosystem of aesthetic discourse is one such market of exchange. But I am
interested in others as well. The film studio, the hospital, the court house,
the university: these are all locations of distinct literary activity. They are
systems that propagate localized notions of document, style, authorship, value,
and canon.

Both senses of locality, micro and macro, lead us to an archive in the history
of literary computation. With the above definitions in mind, I will also
maintain that all computing incorporates literary activity, in so far as it
participates in the circulation of written texts. We can therefore read the
device as we would other forms of literature. More than "can," I will argue for
an ethics of computational reading, by which the device internals *must* be
made available for analysis. Three such devices, which have fundamentally
changed the nature of the literary encounter, will emerge by the end of this
chapter.

## 1.1 Literary Device as Gadget and Technique

What is a literary device? The formal concept of a "device," widely used in
literary studies, is an artifact of an unfortunate translation from Russian.
The word *priem* would be much better translated as "technique," in the sense
of "method," "approach," or "procedure." The word "device" contains these
meanings as well, but in modern usage, it usually carries a concrete
connotation, as "an object, machine, or piece of equipment that has been made
for a special purpose" (Merriam-Webster). "Laying bare the device," for Viktor
Shklovsky, the Russian formalist critic who coined the phrase, meant making
explicit the implied mechanism of the metaphor, particularly in cases where
such metaphors turn "stale," "automatic," and "naturalized," that is, bereft of
their original poetic and evocative power.

One could write, for example, "a field of study," without much thought about
figurative space. Shklovsky would have the reader pause to consider the
implications [@shklovksy_sborniki_1917]. In what sense do ideas resemble (or
not) a field? The poet could further make the metaphor strange. For example, as
a light-hearted example one could write: "to scythe a verdant field of literary
study." The verb (to scythe) and the adjective (verdant) create an unexpected
transference of qualities not present in the original image of the field. They
"break" the metaphor, exposing it as a conceit. To take the metaphor to its
logical conclusion, a writer could depict a fictional character in the act of
mowing a field of grass while discussing the relative merits of Tolstoy and
Proust. The literary artifice makes actual the implied connections between a
field of grass and an intellectual field. The writer now shows what was merely
told before. The technique of defamiliarization finally renews the figure:
discarding the hardened clichÃ©s and suggesting novel linkages between the
concepts.

When pursuing estrangement the author "lays bare" or "makes obvious" the
metaphor by drawing attention to its inner dynamics. Metaphors, as Lakoff and
Johnson famously argued, do more than decorate---they structure everyday human
activity. The metaphor shapes one system of conceptual relationships in terms
of another. For example, the military image of "fortification defence" implies
a conceptual system structuring the "defence of an argument"
[@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 3-14]. When defending the argument, a speaker acts in
the way that resembles combat. A different metaphor would suggest a less
combative mode of engagement between interlocutors.

The Russian formalists of the early twentieth century did not quite have the
contemporary cognitive vocabulary to connect mind and symbol, but they did
understand estrangement as a matter of everyday practice, beyond language
analysis. One of Shklovsky's central concerns was with the automatization of
human experience, by which metaphors lose their evocative power through
repeated use. Such metaphors become mere machines that convey meaning, and,
when habituated, disappear from view. The human, who according to a Kantian
view of the world, should be actively structuring his or her experience, is now
being passively structured by the mechanism. Estrangement de-automates the
experience [@shklovksy_sborniki_1917, @shklovsky_hod_1923,
@boym_estrangement_1996, @holquist_minding_2005]. The interpretation of a
metaphor recovers agency lost to the blind mechanization of thought. Through
defamiliarization, readers discover the principles governing their action: free
to accept some parts of the conceptual transference (the intellectual field
*is* "verdant"!) and to reject others (but we will not "scythe" it).

Vladimir Nabokov, a writer conspicuously aware of his literary--theoretical
heritage, used defamiliarization in the formalist vein often and with
relentless clinical precision. In the short story "A Guide to Berlin," to which
D. Barton Johnson attributes our first glimpse at Nabokov's "mature virtuoso
style [@johnson_guide_1979, 354]," Nabokov writes:

> In front of the house where I live, a gigantic black pipe lies along the
outer edge of the sidewalk. A couple of feet away, in the same file, lies
another, then a third and a fourth---the street's iron entrails, still idle,
not yet lowered into the ground, deep under the asphalt. For the first few days
after they were unloaded, with a hollow clanging, from trucks, little boys
would run on them, up and down, and crawl on all fours through those round
tunnels, but a week later nobody was playing anymore and thick snow was falling
instead; and now when, cautiously probing the treacherous glaze of the sidewalk
with my thick rubber-heeled stick, I go out in the flat gray light of the
morning, an even stripe of fresh snow stretches along the upper side of each
black pipe [...] Today someone wrote "Otto" with his finger on the strip of
virgin snow, and I thought how beautifully that name, with its two soft o's
flanking the pair of gentle consonants suited the silent layer of snow upon
that pipe with its two orifices and its tacit tunnel [@nabokov_guide_1976, 27].

The tightly wound vignette takes the formalist programmatic concern with
"laying bare the device" to its logical and recursively structured conclusion.
The pipes can be read as a metaphor for the literary device. Usually found
beneath the street, they now sit idle and visible above the surface. Yet even
when exposed, the device fails to captivate for long. Disused, it passes out
sight, covered in snow. Concerned with surfaces, the narrator "probes the
glaze" of the street. He finds a palindrome written in snow. The inscription
"OTTO" not only resembles the pipes visually, but is in itself a
surface-revealing inscription that makes the pipes visible again, through the
snow. Although the metaphoric pipe cannot reach beyond the page, the mimetic
surface inscription draws attention to the word's visual shape and acoustics.
It invites readers to perform the symmetry of its assonance and consonance as
they pronounce the word. The round vowels and the interrupting obstruents of
"OTTO" contort the body in accordance with the sound image: reverse mimesis,
the body as sound pipe. The moment of corporeal reenactment briefly transcends
representational and paper-bound confines of the medium. The performance makes
the "making of the literary technique obvious," obvious. In this, lies the
prevalent characteristic of Nabokov's mature work, which often seeks to lift
off of the page through sheer recursion of literary technique, where each
successive turn of the abstraction brings the word closer to the reader.

Yet for all the language games, the formalist conception of a literary device
does not quite reach to affect the materiality of the written word. The
formalists were primarily concerned with structure and sound.[^ln1-formal]
Paper, the literal substance intervening between the two, remained for them a
transparent medium. Concerned with the stripping of surfaces, the formalist and
later the new critical research program stopped at the representational layer
of the literary figure. In *Plain Text*, I would like to take the formalist
program one step further, bringing it closer to a truly materialist poetics.

My interests lie in books and documents as literal devices. When asked in the
context of media history, the question of literary surfaces gains an
instrumental dimension. Physical affordances of liquid crystal displays and
magnetic storage differ drastically from those of goat skins or parchment. Yet
surface representation maintains the illusion of self-similarity. We are faced
with what is called *isomorphic* design, by which the digital page
resembles print. That resemblance is in itself an unexamined metaphor. The
principles of isomorphic design are meant to extend a visual metaphor from one
medium to another. The reader already knows how to turn pages, for example. A
book device therefore simulates pages to ease the cognitive transition to the
new medium. But there is nothing inherently page-like within the device. The
metaphor conceals the structural rift between paper and screen
technology. I am concerned throughout with the particularities of that
concealment. A digital poem, a novel, a physician's script, or a legal contract
all still look like their paper counterparts, but increasingly they behave like
gadgets. These reading and writing appliances do not mediate silently: they
monitor, adjust, warn, and control.

Like the smoke alarm, literary gadgets are governed and internalize government
structures in ways that we have only begun to comprehend. The material
affordances of a textual device influence all higher-level functions of
interpretation.[^ln1-rmedium] Our theories of interpretation are built on
several key assumptions attached to print media. For example, in Hans-Georg
Gadamer's seminal conception of art, the free play of the artistic mind is
transformed into structure (*Gebilde*) that is both "repeatable" and
"permanent" [@gadamer_truth_1975, 110]. Similarly, in *Interpretation Theory*,
Paul Ricoeur writes about the "range of social and political changes" related
to the invention of writing. Human discourse is "fixed" and thereby "preserved
from destruction" in writing [@ricur_interpretation_1976, 26-8].

The literary device offers no such permanence. It contains inscription of a
qualitatively different kind from writing. Based on the blueprints for the
universal Turing machine, the outlines of which will gradually come into focus,
the reading device merely emulates a book. The engineering of literary
artifacts conceal a number of design choices, obscuring  the flows of code and
codex under the familiar guise of surface representation. The digital book is
not just a book. It is a universal Turing machine, a machine, that besides
effecting the figures of reading and writing, holds the potential to effect all
possible metaphors.[^ln1-notquite] The task of the literary scholar reading on the level of
the device becomes to expose the conceptual system that governs the activity.
It is finally to make it available to interpretation---that is to free play of
ideas. I would like to know what happens in the metaphorical transference
between the book and the device emulating the book. Knowing in that sense
allows me consent, or, conversely, to resist elements of imposed structure.

[^ln1-notquite]: To what extent a personal computer is a Turing machine is
matter of contention. The Turing machine is a *thought experiment* that
imagines a device. The PC is a device emulating a Turing machine. See
@putnam_representation_1988, 121-5; @chalmers_does_1996; @petzold_code:_2000. A
more detailed discussion follows in 1.2.

## 1.2 Universal Turing Machines

### The computer is not just a calculator

What sort of a thing is a literary device? It is tempting to think of personal
computers as glorified calculators. And in fact, that is often the popular
image of computing, one that highlights the machine's ability to calculate. The
computer reduces culture to ones and zeroes, thereby diminishing the human
experience.[^ln1-pop] There is some truth to that position, but I would like to
argue here that the connection between computing and calculation is but a piece
of a larger story. The personal computer governing the production of textuality
today emerged from an amalgamation of automated devices: among them the
telegraph, the typewriter, and the calculator [^ln1-ceruzzi]. Each of these these machines
left an imprint on the structure of our everyday engagement with computational
devices.

[^ln1-ceruzzi]: See @ceruzzi_computing_2012, 11 who writes that "the modern
computer is a convergence of separate streams of information handling, each
with its own rich tradition of technological history." "One could add other
antecedents such as the development of radio, motion pictures, and photography"
[@ceruzzi_computing_2012, 11].

It is important to keep these intertwined material lineages in mind because
each brings with it a different set of values and priorities. As complex
computational systems begin to play an ever larger part in our lives, from
structuring family relations to health and nutrition (think social media and
personal activity trackers), we are increasingly faced with a host of
conflicting choices. In building such systems, do we privilege agency or
efficiency, privacy or connectivity, elegance or complexity? These are not
choices that should be left to a calculator. Systems, in themselves, do not
contain values. Rather, values are imposed from without. The question then
becomes one of ends and means. A calculator is most "efficient" when operating
on binary data. Efficiency and complexity are goods for the task of
calculation. A democratic vision of a just society places value on open
deliberation and consensus building. Art calls for beauty. What we commonly
call a computer is also, undeniably, a tool for social and political
transformation: one used to make war and to create art. It is up to us to
decide how.

### The paradox of the Turing machine.

To encounter the computer as a literary device, one must first come to terms
with its peculiar relationship to universal Turing machines. More than any
other mechanism, the Turing machine defined the very limits of computation. But
the Turing machine is also a controversial construct that continues to elicit
debate. The debate concerns a paradox at the very heart of software
engineering. In his seminal 1937 paper on computable numbers, Alan Turing, then
a student at King's College, Turing imagined a physical machine to solve a
theoretical problem. "We may compare a man in the process of computing a real
number to a machine that is only capable of a finite number of conditions"
[@turing_computable_1937, 231].

@turing_computable_1937

A thought experiment about computable numbers that imagines a machine. A
machine that emulates a thought experiment.

[^ln1-pop]: See for example  @drucker_digital_2001; @golumbia_cultural_2009;
@marche_literature_2012.

## 1.3 Three devices
### A. Removable storage media and automation, 1725--1964.[^ln3-loom]

"You must acknowledge that this is readable without special training," reads
the schematic illustration to a Goldberg 1911 patent, simply titled
"Controller." "My invention relates to all controllers," Goldberg writes.
Furthermore, the object of his invention is "to provide a mechanism operable by
a control sheet which is legible to every person having sufficient education to
enable him to read." Goldberg illustrates his invention in attaching to his
patent "a control sheet in which the control characters are in the form of the
letters of the ordinary English alphabet"  [@goldberg_controller_1915]. Rather
than using ticker tape, Goldberg uses perforations that form letters. On
Goldberg's control sheets, the language of machines and the language of humans
coincide.

![Goldberg's Control Cards [@goldberg_controller_1915].](images/control-2.png)

The Controller never caught on, but the patent makes it clear that Goldberg,
among others, was aware of the problem: the mechanization of type, automation,
and remote control required specialized training. With the advent of the
automated telegraph, content meant for people was now being intermixed with
machine-controlling code. To combat mutual unintelligibility, Goldberg imagines
using cards, perforated in the shape of the English alphabet. Besides carrying
(human-readable) content, the perforations do "double duty" to mechanically
manipulate the machine's "blocks," "handles," "terminal blades," and "plungers"
[@goldberg_controller_1915]. Early paper-based storage media, from Morse
code-based ticker tape systems, to the telegraphs of Hughes and Baudot, and to
punch cards that powered weaving looms, player pianos, and census tabulators
coupled message and control. The era of ticker tape punch cards can be thought
to end with the mass-market introduction of IBM's Magnetic Tape/Selectric
Typewriter in 1964.

### B: Magnetic tape, 1888--1968

"Historically unforeseen, barely a thing, software's ghostly presence produces
and defies apprehension," Wendy Chun writes in her *Programmed Visions*, an
influential monograph that continues to shape the field of software studies.
She quotes several prominent computer scientists and media historians to the
same effect. But what gives software its ephemeral quality? Embossed onto
ticker tape or punched into the card, early software protrudes through the
medium. In the age of the telegraph, the largest barrier to the comprehension
of software was encoding. But once the cipher is known and the format
identified, the inscription makes itself visible to view. Early programmable
media could hardly be called ephemeral or immaterial. Anecdotes circulate in
the digital humanities circles of Father Roberto Busa, an early (post-WWII)
pioneer in the field of computational philology, carting his punch cards around
Italy on a truck.[^ln3-busa] Code before its electromagnetic period was
burdensome, fragile, unwieldy, and, most of all, visible.

![IBM Mag Card II, introduced in 1969 for use in the Magnetic Card/Selectric
Typewriter (MC/ST) in 1969. "A simple relationship could be maintained between
a typed page and a recorded card" [@may_ibm_1981, 744]. Image by Pointillist
under GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2.](images/ibm-card.png)

The principles of magnetic recording were developed by Oberlin Smith (among
others), the American engineer who also filed several inventions related to
weaving looms at the end of the nineteenth century. In 1888, inspired by
Edison's mechanical phonograph, Smith made public his experiments with an
"electrical method" of sound recording using a "magnetized cord" (cotton mixed
with hardened steel dust) as a recording medium. These experiments were later
put into practice by Valdemar Poulsen of Denmark, who patented several
influential designs for a magnetic wire recorder [@smith_possible_1888;
@poulsen_method_1900; @engel_1888-1988_1988; @thiele_magnetic_1988;
@daniel_magnetic_1998; @vasic_coding_2004].

In 1964, IBM combined magnetic tape storage with its *Selectric* line of
electric typewriters, introducing the Magnetic Tape Selectric (MT/ST) line of
typewriters to the mass market. Writing for the *Encyclopedia of Library and
Information Science* in 1992, Daniel Eisenberg mentions the MT/ST as one of the
first word processors, defined by the ability to record strokes and to print
them onto paper *as a separate operation* [@eisenberg_word_1992]. The
separation of input and output allows for word processing as such. An article
in the *IBM Journal for Research and Development* explains that the real
significance of the MT/ST workstation was in the introduction of new "power
typing" technologies: "For the first time the typist could type at 'rough
draft' speed, 'backspace and strike over' errors, and not worry about the
pressure of mistakes made at the end of the page" [@may_ibm_1981, 742].

We may think of word processing as a temporal extension of the page. Words on
magnetic storage media begin to exist in the ephemeral state, giving the typist
an opportunity to edit and emend *before* commitment to paper, in its immutable
form, and as a separate operation, removed from the immediate process of
inscription. The very invention of word processing thus corresponds to the
decline of text into ephemera. What was visible through a hole punch on ticker
tape, was now submerged into tape. The tape no longer afforded human legibility
nor comprehension. Encoding used by MT/ST retained the familiar (from the
earlier sections) underlying structure (7-bit encoding, in this case) which, on
tape, ceased to be recoverable by the naked eye. The inscription lay literally
beyond (human) sense. We lack the perceptual apparatus to perceive "magnetic
domains" and "polarities"[^ln3-magnet] that take place of visible alphabets.
Magnetic storage remains, for all unassisted intents and purposes, a black
slate.

### C: Screen, 1968--today

By decoupling input and output, magnetic storage and solid state media afford
the injection of time and space, in arbitrary intervals, between the process of
inscription and comprehension. Content, coupled with control code, sinks
beneath the matte surface of electrical charge. The final movement in the
emergence of automated discourse reintroduces the illusion of immediacy into
the process of inscription. Text, invisible in its material substratum,
reappears on the screen, but, crucially, it no longer corresponds to its mirror
inscription. This property is as perilous as it is liberating: perilous,
because the flows of power and control can now be submerged under the
shimmering surface of the screen, and liberating, because loosely coupled to
their material substratum texts become both more fluid and more portable.
Plainly put, the systematic barriers to copying, sharing, exchanging, editing,
remixing, and disseminating texts are reduced to a minimum.

Ersatz isomorphism (between disk storage and screen image) leads to the
reception of digital text as an ephemeral artifact. With the illusory role of
the screen in mind, I propose 1968 as the year in which the contemporary
textual condition takes its present form. On December 9, 1968 Douglas
Engelbart, then founder and primary investigator at the NASA- and ARPA-funded
Augmentation Research Center lab at the Stanford Research Institute, gave what
later became known colloquially as "the mother of all demos
[@tweney_mother_2008]" before an audience of roughly one thousand or so
computer professionals attending the Fall Joint Computer Conference held at the
Convention Center in San Francisco [@rogers_demo_2005]. The demo announced the
arrival of almost every technology prophesied by Vannevar Bush in his
influential 1945 piece for *The Atlantic* [@bush_as_1945]. Speaking a little
over an hour,  through a headset, in a prerecorded address, Engelbart features
functional (live) prototypes of the following: graphical user interfaces, video
conferencing, remote camera monitoring, links and hypertext, version control,
text search, image manipulation, windows-based user interfaces, digital slides,
networked machines, mouse, stylus, and joystick inputs, and "what you see is
what you get" (WYSIWYG) word processing.

!["NOW IS THE TIME FOB." Schematics for a "display system"
[@engelbart_x-y_1970].](images/engel.png)

In his report to NASA, which sponsored research on "intellect augmentation"
along with DARPA, Engelbart describes his lab as a group of scientists
"developing an experimental laboratory around an interactive, multiconsole
computer-display system" and "working to learn the principles by which
interactive computer aids can augment the intellectual capability of the
subjects" [@engelbart_human_1969, 1]. Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) displays were
central to this research mission. In one of many patents that came out of
"intellect augmentation" laboratory, Engelbart pictures the "display system" as
a workstation that combines a typewriter, a CRT, and a mouse. The system is
frozen in mid-action, with the words "THE TIME IS NOW FOB" prominently
displayed on the screen. Although Engelbart does not explain the message, the
system's user is evidently in the process of editing a sentence and about to
correct the nonsensical FOB into a FOR. Engelbart writes, "One of the
potentially most promising means for delivering and receiving information to
and from digital computers involves the display of computer outputs as visual
representation on a cathode ray tube and the alternation of the display by
human operator in order to deliver instructions to the computer"
[@engelbart_x-y_1970].

The CRT closes the circuit between human and machine, with a few caveats. In
practice, the short-lived screen-less word processors (like the IBM MT/ST)
necessitated for the cognitively arduous task of continuously keeping the
underlying document structure in the mind's eye. The CRT lifts that burden by
unfolding the structure topographically, allowing for spatial navigation along
the document---restoring, in a sense, the natural affordances of print. Data
becomes visible again. Moreover, represented in the shimmer of the cathode ray,
it attaches itself lightly to the retina. Users trying out this way of writing
for the first time report that the screen liberates them from the material
confines of print textuality. One user, possibly Engelbart himself, writes the
following:[^ln3-follow]

[^ln3-follow]: I reproduce the text verbatim and preserving the line breaks,
since formatting is an important part of the reported experience.

```
    1B2B1 "To accommodate and preserve a thought or
    piece of information that isn't related to the work
    of the moment, one can very quickly and easily
    insert a note within the structure of a file at such
    a place that it will nether get in the way nor get
    lost.

    1B2B2 "Later, working in another part of the file,
    he can almost instantly (e.g. within two seconds)
    return to the place where he temporarily is storing
    such notes, to modify or add to any of them.

    1B2B3 "As any such miscellaneous thought develops,
    it is easy (and delightful) to reshape the structure
    and content of its discussion material.
```

Engelbart, interested in collecting empirical phenomenological accounts of the
system, records what must count as several of the most evocative passages to
appear on the pages of a NASA technical report. In the "Results and Discussion"
section an anonymous user continues to report:

```
1B4 "I find that I can express myself better, if I can
make all the little changes and experiments with wording
and structure as they occur to me." [Here the user
experiments a little with using structural decomposition
of a complex sentence.]
```

A deconstruction indeed follows, as the author begins to deviate from the
conventions of the technical report. The numbered passages, and unexpected
enjambment, heightens the staccato quality of the prose, which at times reaches
towards the lyric:


```
    1B4A "I find that I write faster and more freely,

        1B4A1 "pouring thoughts and trial words on the
        screen with much less inhibition,

        1B4A2 "finding it easy to repair mistakes or wrong
        choices

            1B4A22 "so while capturing a thought I don't
            have to inhibit the outpouring of thought and
            action to do it with particular correctness,

        1B4A3 "finding that several trials at the right
        wording can be done very quickly

            1B4A3A "so I can experiment, easily take a look
            and see how a new version strikes me--and often
            the first unworried attempt at a way to express
            something turn out to be satisfactory, or at
            least to require only minor touch up.

        1B4A4 "Finding that where I might otherwise
        hesitate in search of the right word, I now pour out
        a succession of potentially appropriate words,
        leaving them all the while the rest of the
        statement takes shape. Then I select from among
        them, or replace them all, or else merely change the
        list a it and wait for a later movement of the
        spirit.
```

When input and output coincide in time, as they do on paper, mistakes can be
costly. The writer must commit to making an inscription and, once made, the
inscription gains permanence in a way that is difficult to correct. One can
erase, removing a layer of physical material, or cover up, adding a layer of
white ink to repair the damage. Engelbart's anonymous writer reports a feeling
of freedom from such commitment to physical medium. He or she can simply
"backspace" and start over. The contemporary reader may take such things for
granted now, but imagine trying to write in that way for the first time.
Writing "comes easy," becomes "uninhibited," and it "pours out" experimentally.
Rather than manipulate language mentally, the writer "pours" the words onto the
screen and then "selects" the right one, without hesitation. The highly
hierarchical and blocky paragraph structure, along with its repetitive refrain,
"finding" and "I find that," gives the prose a hypnotic drive forward, which
matches the reported experience of liberation. Anonymous continues:

```
    1B4B "I find that,

        1B4B1 "being much more aware of

            1B4B1A "the relationships among the phrases of a
            sentence,

            1B4B1B "among the statements of a list,

            1B4B1C "and among the various level and members
            of a branch,

        1B4B2 "being able

            1B4B2A "to view them in different ways,

            1B4B2B "to rearrange them easily,

            1B4B2C "to experiment with certain special
            portrayals,

                1B4B2C1 "not available easily in unstructured data

                1B4B2C2 "or usable without the CRT display,

        1B4B3 "and being aware that

            1B4B3A "I can (and am seeking to) develop still
            further special conventions and computer aids

            1B4B3B "to make even more of this available and
            easy,

        1B4B4 "all tend to increase

            1B4B4A "my interest and experimentation

            1B4B4B "and my conviction that this is but a
            peek at what is to come soon.
```

The passages are too contrived to be spontaneous admissions of phenomenological
experience. Despite the experimental structure, the passages contain a
well-formed rhetorical message advancing key elements of Engelbart's research
program, which aimed to develop new data structures in combination with new
ways of displaying them. Yet I cannot help but be carried away by the fluency
of the prose and by the sheer audacity of the project. Here's someone who has
not only glimpsed the future, but has also brought it into being. The
contemporary author can drag and drop passages around with more facility, but
he has not himself structured his cognitive environment. In Engelbart's terms,
someone else has augmented the author's intellect, in ways that may or may not
fit the individual psyche. That feeling of effortless textuality cannot
therefore be taken at face value, by the unreliable phenomenological accounts
alone. To bring his system into being, Engelbart convened what he called a
"bootstrap community," which through recursive self-improvement could lift
itself up towards a smarter, more efficient, and as the report's lexicon
betrays, a more human way of working. To accomplish this, the group crafted new
input and output devices. They wrote new programming languages, compilers to
interpret them, and debuggers to troubleshoot. They invented word editors and
format control languages. Here's how Engelbart diagrams a *part* of his
text-manipulation language in the same report:

!["State--chart portrayal of part of text--manipulation control language"
[@engelbart_human_1969, 36].](images/engel-edit.png)

The diagram shows much attention to the detail of and love for the writing
craft. But there is also much complexity. It is near impenetrable. In building
their own tools, Engelbart's team lifted themselves up by the bootstraps. But
it was not the machine that lifted them up---it was the process of creating the
machine. The very metaphor of bootstrapping suggests the impossibility of using
one's bootstraps to pull others out of the Platonic cave. As a side effect of
that effort, text, before readily apparent on the page, now enters a complex
system of executable code and control structure. The perception of material
lightness of textual being comes at the price of legibility. Would new authors
find the same ease in the complication of the mechanism? I suspect not unless
they become an active part of a "bootstrapping community" of their own.

As the chapter is about to take on the intellectual history of document
structure, I propose we keep the above three devices at hand: Goldberg's
Controller, the IBM MT/ST, and Engelbart's Time Fob. In the first of these,
text structure and machine control lie before us for inspection. The second one
is mute: a black slate. The last of these belongs to what Peter Denning calls
the "third generation" of computer systems, an assemblage of storage, input,
and output devices that continues to shape the contemporary human encounter
with text. In this period, the inscription fractures into traces of disparate
kind: some that fade from view to appear elsewhere in the system in a more
enduring form, as an arrangement of floating gates; some that persist in the
flicker of the cathode ray or the flow of the liquid crystal, but only as long
as the device draws power; and yet others that simply dissemble to create the
illusion of effortless textuality.




## 1.4 WYSINAWYG (What You See Is Not Always What You Get)

I do not trust the text appearing before my eyes. Wendy Hui Kyong Chun calls
magnetic storage the "enduring ephemeral," which "creates unforeseen
degenerative links between humans and machines" [@chun_enduring_2008, 148]. If
the floating gate transistor,[^ln1-gate] where my text now lives, can be called
the enduring ephemeral, I will call my liquid crystal display, where the text
shows itself, fading persistence. This is not to believe (fearing the wrath of
textual thinkers like Jerome McGann, Johanna Drucker, and Katherine Hayles)
that text on the screen lacks materiality. Not at all. Only that it seems to
drift from surface to surface, beyond the field of vision, in ways that erode
trust in the general permanence of the literary system. If we are destined to
dwell on surfaces, I do not know to which surface to attach my attention: the
screen or the floating gate.

I have before me at least two inscriptions: one as circuit state on my hard
drive, and another as crystal phase on the screen. They denote the same idea,
but in two distinct places. How did this duplicity come to be? And what impact
does it have on the life of a mind? In an attempt to answer, I offer the
following three historical preconditions for digital textuality. They are not
meant as history, but rather as signposts to mark the journey ahead. The schema
proceeds roughly as follows: first, content and control couple at the visible
surface of removable storage media (ticker tape and punch card); second,
inscription splits into input and output, retreating into magnetic storage to
reemerge at last on screen, in the same guise, but also, as we suspect, somehow
transformed: less solid and concealing something beneath the phantasmal shell
of its former appearance.[^ln1-denning]

Where does text reside? If you are reading this book in print, you can point to
the page and be fairly certain of the answer: here, on the page. If you are
reading the book on a *device*, things get more complicated. You can point to
the screen and yet it would not be enough to say that the text resides there.
The screen will go dark when the device loses power, but the text will
persevere within, stored at another physical location. Deep within a device,
the text will be embedded into some sort of a storage medium, usually a
magnetic or a "solid state" drive. Where the digital text resides affects even
those who prefer to read in print. Like most literature today, print materials
are also "born digital." At some point of time, they occupy the same
duplicitous position between storage medium and pixel.

Few readers today will be able to give an account of a pixel's passage from
keystroke to ink or pixel. The vast machinery that brings literature to life
hides from the reader's view. Literature conceals. Even on the level of
stylistics, writing well is meant to evoke a sense of ease where it is usually
the product of painstaking labor. Let us hold on to that intuition for the
duration of this chapter: writing conceals labor.

Literature hides the labor of readers and writers. In another sense, there is
also the concealment of raw, physical energy that "goes into the word." The
work it takes to get a rock up a mountain gives it potential energy to roll
back down. By definition, potential energy relates to the possibility of "work
done." The rock can pull something up the hill as it is falling down, for
example. What of the energy that went into the writing of these sentences? I
spent a few *joules* compressing the springs under my keyboard. Many more went
into my laptop as electric current. Why? To overcome matter's passive impedance
of advancing change. To preserve and to communicate this message *amperes*, the
unit of electrical flow, struggled with *ohms*, the unit of electrical
resistance.

There is energy too in the librarian's effort to archive a book, in the
churning of a search engine to make it accessible to a reading public, and in
the work of a truck driver who ferries information by road. The sum of these
energies, which seem significant now in their accumulation, went into the
writing of these words. Much of it dissipated as heat and light. And some of
it---just a small part---left an imprint somewhere. It left a trace of ink on a
page, magnetized a piece of tape, or shifted the configuration of the floating
gate buried within the solid state drive. Finally, the potential energy
remaining within the word began a chain of electrical reactions in the reader's
brain. The mental effort or reading and writing amounts to "knowledge
work."[@liu_laws_2004] Ultimately, writing serves to connect the electrical
circuitry of at least two neurological systems. Reading leaves the brain in a
different state than before. Writing, in this light, involves the transmission
of neural activity between hosts. When considered as a physical process,
literature is a type of electroencephalography (EEG), or electric head writing.

![The place of linguistic structure among "the facts of language". Saussure's communication circuit [@saussure_course_1986, 11].](images/saussure.jpg)

Ferdinand de Saussure's paradigmatic circuit model of communication (pictured
here) follows from head to head. In *Plain Text*, I will complicate that
picture by tracing the passage of thought further from *inscription* to a
*device*. At each stage of the passage, we will observe the process of encoding
and decoding, by which one type of substance---a thought---is converted into
another type: a word or the oscillation of an electrical current. I will
present here a type of a materialist reading practice, which pays attention to
the physical properties of the communication act. I will give that practice a
name---microanalysis---and a purpose: to uncover the energy gained or lost in
the transformation from code to code and from medium to medium.

I am concerned with energy because too often our foundational models of reading
and interpretation take the text as a fixed given. Even in our most
destabilizing readings, like Jacques Derrida's "Plato's Pharmacy", the
materiality of the text is assumed to persevere. "We will take off here from
the *Phaedrus*," Derrida writes [@derrida_dissemination_1981, 66]. "The reader
can count the lines" at the "precisely calculated center of the dialogue"
[@derrida_dissemination_1981, 67]. Plato's dialog has for Derrida a definite
beginning, middle, and end. Derrida asks the reader "to return to the text,"
even when the text "remains forever imperceptible"
[@derrida_dissemination_1981, 63 & 95].[^ln1-translate] When Derrida talks in
this usual way of a literary scholar, he uses the word "text" in two distinct
ways: one, as an abstract mental construct---the one that is "forever
imperceptible," and the physical one, which has a definite and stable
topography---the one to which we return with confidence.

In the vision of post-structural poetics, the text in the abstract resembles
the quicksand of unstable signifies. In other words, one can define a word only
in relation to other words. In this way, Derrida describes texts as
"dissimulation of the woven texture," "a web that envelops a web," and "an
organism, indefinitely regenerating its own tissue behind the cutting trace,
the decision of each reading" [@derrida_dissemination_1981, 63]. In *Plain
Text*, I want to further challenge the stability of the text as a physical
artifact. The literary device reconfigures the text dynamically in the process
of reading. Because the text is no longer fixed into a stable medium, we must
do away with page numbers, for example. Pagination changes according to the
size of the device. More intrusively, the reader cannot rely on finding the
same text upon return. The writer, the book seller, or the censor have the
technological capacity to alter the text in real time, even as the book rests
in hand or on a shelf.

Much is at stake in the material affordances of the literary artifact. The
political struggle for meaning-making, that is, the very opportunity to engage
in the act of interpretation, begins with the text as a material object. In the
West, it is easy to forget the blunt effectiveness of physical control. Books
that are burned or locked up cannot be read at all. Global inequities of access
to knowledge are much more obvious in the post-colonial world, where readers
print their own books and build their own libraries to preserve access. Witness
the so-called "shadow libraries" of Eastern Europe [@tenen_book_2014,
@bodo_short_2014], the street book vendors of India and Pakistan
[@mahmood_copyright_2005, @liang_piracy_2009], and the *samizdat* press of
Nigeria under the conditions that have been described as "book famine"
[@okiy_photocopying_2005, @nkiko_book_2014]. Yet despite the hardship, these
practices are at least engaged in the proactive preservation of the literary
sphere. Shadow libraries erect architectures of knowledge and create reading
publics who own the means of textual diffusion. They make copies, write server
software that aids in the distribution, and build archives.
Elsewhere---here---such infrastructures are created for us. Consequently, they
disappear from view. If indeed my intuition is correct and readers do not know
what books are, how they are made, or what they are capable of, we are all
operating under the conditions of profound alienation.

I want to foreshadow now what will become the punchline of the whole book:
namely that the ghost in the machine cannot be reduced to some vague notions of
value---these amount to a distraction, which lies plainly upon the surface. The
conspicuous ghostly apparition (indicating the absence of a living subject) is
agency itself, which, for now, necrotically attaches itself to dead things like
systems, mediums, and automated discourses. If all this talk of value, ghosts,
and necromancy sounds familiar, the reader will not be surprised when I advance
Karl Marx as a preeminent theorist of the algorithm and someone able to help us
reason through Kittler's computational conundrum. On towards Marx then (who
will appear much later), through the machine that, although intimately familiar
to every writer and consumer of text by touch, remains alien and alienating in
its hidden possibilities, soothing and threatening all at once.

## Notes

[^ln1-translate]: "In our discussion of this text we have been using an
authoritative French translation of Plato, the one published by Guillaume Bude.
In the case of *Phaedrus*, the translation is by Leon Robin. We will continue to
refer to it, inserting Greek text in parenthesis [@derrida_dissemination_1981,
71]."

[^ln1-rmedium]: For example, see Paul Ricoeur writing on the change in media
from speaking to writing: "The most obvious change from speaking to writing
concerns the relation between message and its medium or channel. At first
glance, it concerns only this relation, but upon closer examination, the first
alteration irradiates in every direction, affecting in decisive manner all the
factors and functions" [@ricur_interpretation_1976, 25].

[^ln1-formal]: I discuss the idea of form as structure and sound in greater
detail in Chapter 3.

[^ln1-gurevich]: Kittler mistakingly attributes "Algorithms in the World of
Bounded Resources" to Brosl Hasslacher. The author is rather Yuri Gurevich,
Principle Researcher at Microsoft Research and then a professor at the
University of Michigan. Hasslacher's essay entitled "Beyond the Turing Machine"
appeared in the same volume of collected essays, @herken_universal_1988.

[^ln1-bottom]: For example, in the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model of
communication, the top-most layer of protocols and interface method is called
the "application layer" and the bottom-most layer the "physical layer"
[@peterson_computer_2007, 26-28]. Timothy Colburn and Gary Shute describe it as
being "responsible for encoding bits onto a transmission medium, whether wires,
fiber optics, or radio broadcast, in ways that maximize the transmission rate
and minimize sensitivity to noise [@colburn_abstraction_2007, 181].

[^ln1-abstraction]: This is a topic of some contention in the literature. In
his influential paper on the topic, James Moor includes the immateriality of
software as one of the "three myths" of computer science. "As a practical
matter, what we regard as computer instructions, and consequently what we
regard as computer programs, is determined by computers available," he writes
[@moor_three_1978, 215]. Nurbay Irmark argues that software is instead a purely
abstract artifact, akin to a musical work [@irmak_software_2012]. See also
@turner_programming_2013; @colburn_software_1999.

[^ln1-turing]: The intellectual history of the Turing machine is well
established, in multiple works on the subject. It follows the Greek Diophantus,
RenÃ© Descartes, Georg Cantor, David Hilbert, Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell,
Kurt GÃ¶del, Ludwig Wittgenstein [@petzold_annotated_2008;
@herken_universal_1988; @grattan-guinness_development_1981].

[^ln1-alt]: "We have to think (in a completely novel way) the relation between
a science and the ideology [...] the fact that such an investigation confronts
us with the observation that every science, in the relationship it has with
ideology it emerged from, can only be thought as a 'science of ideology, would
disconcert us, were we not forewarned of the name of the *object* of knowledge,
which can only exist in the form of ideology" [@althusser_reproduction_2014,
46].

[^ln1-derr]: See @derrida_writing_1978. I am alluding particularly to
statements like "ethnology-like any science-comes about within the element of
discourse," and "this moment was that in which language invaded the universal
problematic; that in which, in the absence of a center or origin, everything
became discourse-provided we can agree on this word-that is to say, when
everything became a system where the central signified, the original or
transcendental signified, is never absolutely present outside a system of
differences. The absence of the transcendental signified extends the domain and
the interplay of signification ad infinitum" (278-294).

[^ln1-flip]: There is a long-standing joke in Marxist literature that involves
flipping Hegel, who prioritized the transcendent spiritual over the physical
and material forms of life, over "back to his feet." See for example
@marx_marx-engels_1978: "The form of wood, for instance, is altered, by making
a table out of it. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common,
every-day thing, wood. But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is
changes into something transcendent. It not only stands with its feed on the
ground, but, in relation to all other commodities, it stands on its head, and
evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than
'table-turning' ever was" (320). See also @engels_ludwig_1941: "Thereby the
dialectic of the concept itself became merely the conscious reflex of the
dialectical motion of the real world and the dialectic of Hegel was placed upon
its head; or rather, turned off its head, on which it was standing before, and
placed on its feet again" (44).

[^ln1-dirt]: Think of text as substance and literature as surface. The first is
like dirt where the second is gound. We play with one on top of the other.

[^ln1-gate]: Solid state memory devices like flash memory store information in
capacitor "circuit states." This by contrast with electromagnetic storage that
works by modulating electrical charge over a magnetic surface. Solid state
capacitor storage was used in the earliest computers
[@kahng_semipermanent_1967, 1296], but was prohibitively expensive to
manufacture until well into the twenty-first century, when solid state drives
began to replace electromagnetic storage on consumer devices. In an early
(1967) paper on "A Floating Gate and Its Application to Memory Devices," Kahng
and Sze explain: "A structure has been proposed and fabricated in which
semipermanent charge storage is possible. A floating gate is placed a small
distance from an electron source. When an appropriately high field is applied
through an outer gate, the floating gate charges up. The charges are stored
even after the removal of the charging field due to much lower back transport
probability [...] Such a device functions as a bistable memory with
nondestructive read-out features. The memory holding time observed was longer
than one hour" [@kahng_floating_1967, 1288]. See also @horton_experimental_1962
and @frohman-bentchkowsky_fully_1971 on "floating gate avalanche injection."

[^ln1-denning]: These stages correspond roughly to the "three generations of
electronic computing" outlined in Peter Denning's "theory of operating systems"
[@denning_third_1971].

