# Chapter 1: Laying Bare the Device: Computer's Modernist, Literary Roots

"The weakest point in our present day universe is the incapacity of man to meet
the machine, the cultural conserve, or the robot, other than through
submission, actual destruction, and social revolution" [@moreno_who_1953, 595].
So wrote the Austrian-American psychiatrist, Jacob L. Moreno in his
idiosyncratic, sprawling, and now seldom read volume, *Who Shall
Survive?*[^ln2-moreno]

Humanity, according to Moreno, faced two major threats: one, human aggression,
and two, the aggression of robots: "cultural conserves" and "zootechnical
animals." When Moreno referred to robots, he meant all devices, social
structures, and products of the mind which persevere autonomously to compete
for attention. Conserves, Moreno thought, diminish the human capacity for
cultural production. Robots create the illusion of "finished, perfected
product[s]," which substitute for creativity [@moreno_who_1953, 595]. In this
way, musical records obviate musicians, just like books do authors.

An "avalanche of ghosts" from the past enters into an evolutionary contest for
survival [@moreno_who_1953, 596]. Unlike speech, which is extinguished as soon
as conversations end, written words past persist and proliferate. They survive
and continue to shape the social and the mental worlds to come. "[T]he author
is immaterial," Moreno wrote:

> the book goes to all places and to all people, it does not care where it is
> read and by whom. Many robots have further in common the attribute of
> comparative immortality.  A book, a film, an atomic bomb, they do not perish
> in the human sense, the same capacity is always there, they can be
> reproduced *ad infinitum* [...] Our human world is increasingly filled with
> robots and there seems to be no end to new forms and new developments.
> [@moreno_who_1953, 600-1]

The musician and the author struggle to survive in competition with historical
records. The conserve reduces humans to "machine-addict[s]" who reside in a
"jungle of robots" that suffocates spontaneous activity [@moreno_who_1953,
597, 601].

Similar to king Thamus from Plato's *Phaedrus*, Moreno thus distrusted rote
mechanization of thought. In the name of comfort, safety, and prolonged life,
technocracy disempowers, Moreno believed, the very subjects whose lives it
claims to preserve. The zootechnical animal exchanges human capacities for
self-determination for promised certainty of a better future. The eugenic
dreamer and the technological dreamer have this one idea in common:

> to substitute and hasten the slow process of nature. Once the creative
> process is encapsulated in a book it is *given*; it can be recapitulated
> eternally by everybody without the effort of creating anew. Once a machine
> for a certain pattern of performance is invented a certain produce can be
> turned out in infinite numbers practically without the effort of man. [...]
> Once that miraculous eugenic formula will be found a human society will be
> given prefect and smooth at birth, like a book off a press
> [@moreno_who_1953, 598].

Knowledge, in Plato's terms, is thereby replaced with the simulation or
imitation [*homoiōmata*] of knowledge [@plato_phaedrus_1999, 482(250a)]. It is
given and received passively, bypassing the critical faculties. Robots appear
to us in their perfected state, whereby the labor and struggle for their
production is elided.

Instrumental and institutional mechanisms alike fell under Moreno's suspicion:
the plow, pen, book, gun; central planning, corporate governance, and legal
codex [@moreno_who_1953]. All robots in that sense constituted a species of
autonomous agency, a problem long in the background of Western liberal
thought.[^ln1-consensus] For Moreno, books and bombs resembled one another
because they both embodied volition detached from its human sources. Once in
motion, both books and bombs seem to act in the world autonomously. The
projectile acts at a distance; once launched, it completes its grim mandate
even if the command to act is withdrawn. Technology of the word similarly
decouples readers from writers. Books persist to mean in the absence of their
authors. Once decoupled, seemingly autonomous paper agents---folders, novels,
contracts---clutter the social sphere, continuing to structure human
experience in the absence of the originating accord. Agency so detached
operates without consensus or comprehension. Books are "robot[s] par
excellence," Moreno wrote [@moreno_who_1953, 600]. They elongate agency's
causal chain to effect change in mental states across time and space. Yet
books and bullets are not social actors in a true sense. One cannot assign
blame to them. They do not figure independently in our models of justice and
responsibility.

Moreno's claims and his language might seem curious today, but they were not
unusual in the larger context of early twentieth century post-Kantian
humanism. In Moreno's work one discerns the influence of Marx's critique of
the fetishism of commodities, a dynamic by which "definite social relation
between men" assumes "the fantastic form of a relation between things"
[@marx_capital_1967, 72]. Moreno arrived at a similar conclusion by another
logic. In creating some of the earliest examples of social network graphs, he
found (and objected to) the presence of things in the position of social
actors. His objections to the automatization of human experience echo also
those of his near contemporaries like Viktor Shklovsky, Martin Heidegger,
Walter Benjamin, and Hannah Arendt.

***

Moreno helps us see the book in a new light. If it was always, as he
suggested, a robot for enacting action at a distance, it is all the more
robotic as a device that draws electricity, an electronic book. When, in the
1930s, one could view Moreno's rhetoric about books and bombs as fanciful,
technophobic even, a century later his concerns appear prescient. The
unintended consequences of automated and disembodied agency, from artificially
intelligent personal assistants to market trading algorithms, worry
contemporary scientists, legislators, and philosophers.

Today, a machine that looks like a book can also function as a gun or trigger.
Electronic books read on mobile phones, tablets, and personal computers
comprise a part of the same digital framework that powers drones and aircraft
carriers. Computers in the service of the world's largest purveyors of
literature are also used by air traffic control and covert intelligence
agencies [See @soyata_combat:_2012; @logicworks_government_2015]. Cellular
phones, once devices for voice telecommunication, are now used both to read
books and to detonate remote explosives.

These conditions compel us---historians, philologists, et al.---to reconsider
the cozy relationship we have had with books since Gutenberg. My task in this
chapter will be to illuminate the blueprint of computation within electronic
books and thereby make them strange again. In a reciprocal movement, I aim
also to place modern computers within the long history of the book; to view
them as technique for literary and not just mathematical symbolism. To do
this, I will construct a short prehistory of the literary device, based on
materials drawn from the first half of the twentieth century. I am interested
here broadly in the concepts of device and technique which emerge in the
thought of Russian, German, and English philologists, whose work I will cover
in the first section of this chapter. Subsequent sections trace the
concomitant emergence of literary device in another sense, as a thought
experiment staged by Ludwig Wittgenstein and completed by Alan Turing in the
1920s and 1930s. These experiments lead us to consider a number of fantastical
broken reading and writing machines that define the limits of symbolic
thought. They culminate in the schematics for a specific mechanism, which lies
at the modernist roots of contemporary computational culture.

## Technique

What kind of a *thing* is a literary *device*? The formalist concept of a
device is in part an artifact of an unfortunate translation from the Russian
*priem*. The word would be better translated as "technique," in the sense of
"method," "approach," or "procedure." Device contains these meanings as well,
but in modern usage, it often carries a more concrete connotation, as an
"object, machine, or piece of equipment that has been made for some special
purpose" [@_device_2016]. "Laying bare the device," for Viktor Shklovsky, who
coined the phrase, meant making explicit the implied mechanisms of a literary
trope, particularly in cases where such tropes turn "stale," "automatic," and
"naturalized," that is, bereft of their evocative power.[^ln2-shklov]

Vladimir Nabokov, a writer conspicuously aware of his literary-theoretical
heritage, used the formal technique of "laying bare the device" often and with
relentless clinical precision. In the short story "A Guide to Berlin," to
which D. Barton Johnson attributes our first glimpse at Nabokov's "mature
virtuoso style," Nabokov wrote:

> In front of the house where I live, a gigantic black pipe lies along the
outer edge of the sidewalk. A couple of feet away, in the same file, lies
another, then a third and a fourth---the street's iron entrails, still idle,
not yet lowered into the ground, deep under the asphalt. For the first few
days after they were unloaded, with a hollow clanging, from trucks, little
boys would run on them, up and down, and crawl on all fours through those
round tunnels, but a week later nobody was playing anymore and thick snow was
falling instead; and now when, cautiously probing the treacherous glaze of the
sidewalk with my thick rubber-heeled stick, I go out in the flat gray light of
early morning, an even stripe of fresh snow stretches along the upper side of
each black pipe [...] Today someone wrote "Otto" with his finger on the strip
of virgin snow, and I thought how beautifully that name, with its two soft o's
flanking the pair of gentle consonants, suited the silent layer of snow upon
that pipe with its two orifices and its tacit tunnel [@nabokov_guide_1976, 27;
@johnson_guide_1979, 354].

This tightly wound vignette dramatizes a distinctly formalist concern. The
pipes embody the literary device. Usually found beneath the street, they now
sit idle and visible above the surface. Even when exposed, the structure fails
to captivate for long. Disused, it once again passes out of sight, covered in
snow. Concerned with surfaces, the narrator "probes the glaze" of the street
and finds a palindrome written in snow. The inscription "OTTO" not only
resembles the pipes visually, but is in itself a surface-revealing inscription
that makes the pipes visible again. The mimetic surface inscription draws
attention to the word's visual shape and acoustics. It invites readers to
perform the symmetry of its consonance as they pronounce the word. The round
vowels and the interrupting obstruents of "OTTO" contort the body in
accordance with the sound image: reverse mimesis, the body as sound pipe. The
moment of corporeal reenactment transcends the representational and
paper-bound confines of the medium. The pipes reach beyond page. The
performance makes the "making of the literary technique obvious," obvious.
The metaphor implicit in the idea of "laying bare the device" is thereby
revealed. In this lies the prevalent characteristic of Nabokov's mature work,
which often seeks to transcend the diegetic, fictional world through sheer
recursion of literary technique, where each successive turn of abstraction
pushes the buried symbol closer to the reader.

Despite such emphasis on devices, formalist poetics (both in art and in
scholarship) fell short of producing an explicit theory of technique. In this
section, I will attempt to reconstruct the notion of technique in the thought
of three major literary theorists of the interwar period: Viktor Shklovsky,
Percy Lubbock, and Mikhail Bakhtin. I do not mean to suggest that the group
amounts to a coherent school of thought. Rather, I am interested in observing
the development of technique as a concept in parallel traditions at a
formative time in the history of literary technology. I am consequently going
to do something unusual in this chapter, namely juxtapose relevant patches of
literary theory and material culture, which converge on a mechanistic view of
reading, writing, and interpretation. These observations evidence fragments of
a larger history. The reader should not mistake them for a complete canvas. I
arrange them in this way to provoke a response and to find curious early
intersections between disparate intellectual traditions---literary theory,
philosophy, and electrical engineering---which intertwine to form the fabric
of contemporary computational culture.

Viewed in the context of technological development, the emergence of technique
as a critical category illustrates the broader concerns of the machine age.
The notion of technology itself does not fully find its place in the critical
literature until the 1950-1970s, judging by the rash of titles like Martin
Heidegger's *Die Frage nach der Technik* (1954), Jacques Ellul's *La technique
ou l'enjeu du siècle* (1954), Lynn White's *Medieval Technology and Social
Change* (1966), and Viktor Fekiss's *The Technological Man* (1969).  Calling
for the institution of a new field in 1959, editors of the inaugural issue of
*Technology and Culture* wrote about the "neglect of the study of technology"
amidst a body of extant work that has "scarcely constituted" a systematic
scholarly discipline [@kranzberg_at_1959, 5-6].  "*Technology* is a word whose
time has come," Langdon Winner would still write in 1978 in his influential
*Autonomous Technology* [@winner_autonomous_1978, 4].

Seen in this light, the pre-WWII concern with literary technique anticipates
the post-war turn towards technology as a field of cultural analysis. Before
technology, there was technique.[^ln1-tech] The formalist period in literary
theory signalled a turn away from history and philosophy of literature towards
the mechanics of literary production. The technical turn entailed a
mechanistic understanding of language, in which linguistic phenomena was
viewed as a system of moving parts, whose relationship to one another was
determined by discoverable laws. The turn to technique also meant that the
mechanisms of meaning production, on the sides of both authorship and
apprehension, were made accessible to a mass audience. Russian formalists in
particular understood their task as one of radical democratization of the
literary sphere.[^ln2-fact] High literature, once the purview of a select few,
could now belong to the proletariat at large. This also meant that literature
was *composable*: it could be distilled into discrete and reproducible
rules---technique over art---to be learned and shared widely.

The turn to technique gains significance in its instrumental context. The rise
of formalist and consequently structuralist thought---along with philosophy's
linguistic turn, which saw language as a system of rule-based
games---parallels the rise of rule-based programmable media: punch cards,
magnetic drums, and ticker tape. That is not to imply that thought and
technology stand in a reductive causal relationship to one another. Rather,
they form a feedback loop, in which instruments, practices, and explanatory
models evolve through mutual reciprocation. Locating the literary-theoretical
construct of the device within its technological context allows us to witness
the contemporaneous evolution and mutual interdependence between art,
engineering, and philosophy. The origins of computer science and literary
formalism can be traced back to shared theoretical assumptions and
technological contingencies coming to the fore of telecommunications in the
first few decades of the twentieth century.

It is at this time that the formalist concept of technique began to abstract
the idea of literary production from its irreproducible contexts. The emphasis
on craft over art implied primarily a change in the artist's relationship to
labor. Walter Benjamin had this view in mind when he wrote, decades later,
about works of art that could no longer be thought of as "rigid, isolated
object[s]." Rather, they had to be "inserted into the context of living social
relations," determined by their relation to literary production
[@benjamin_author_1983, 87]. Technique, for Benjamin, made literary works
"accessible" to materialist analysis [@benjamin_author_1983, 87]. Where the
artistic genius was unique, craft carried with it a model of inheritance.
Where genius was born, technique was shared. Where artists labored alone,
craftsmen learned their trade in workshops, as part of a collective.

In a more general sense, the turn to technique could be seen as a rejection of
Romanticism: Schopenhauer's aesthetics for example, which emphasised
individual creative genius that reached "beyond the objects which actually
present themselves" towards the transcendent ideal [@schopenhauer_world_1906,
249 and 217-346]. Formalism dispelled the myth of lone genius creators,
orienting artists instead towards discovery through handicraft. In his "Art as
Device," Shklovsky wrote:

> The work of poetic schools amounts to the aggregation and the discovery of
> new devices/techniques [*priem*] for the arrangement and the processing of
> linguistic material, and, in particular, more so with the rearrangement of
> figure [*obraz*] rather than with its creation [@shklovksy_poetika_1919,
> 102].

Influenced by Herbert Spencer, the formalists imagined language to comprise a
a natural, physics-based system, which tended towards the conservation of
energy [@shklovksy_poetika_1919, 105]. In his influential 1852 essay on the
*The Philosophy of Style*, Spencer wrote about the limited reserves of the
"recipient's mental energy."[@spencer_philosophy_1892, 7] "A reader or
listener," he wrote, "has at each moment but limited amount of mental power
available,"

> [h]ence, the more time and attention it takes to receive and
understand each sentence, the less time and attention can be given to the
contained idea [@spencer_philosophy_1892, 3].

The ideal writer thus strove to minimize reader mental exertion, following the
law of what Spencer called the "economy of composition:" to say as much as
possible in the most concise and direct way possible. Poetry for Spencer was
exemplary in that regard: it habituated those "symbols of thought" and
"methods of using them" that have proven themselves to be most effective
through continuous use [@spencer_philosophy_1892, 32]. Spencer's ideal of
literature was of the most thrifty, economical kind.

Shklovsky agreed with Spencer about the dynamics of everyday language, but not
poetry. Poetry does not facilitate communication, he argued, it disrupts it.
Poets "arrange and process" habituated material with the view of
"resurrecting" the vitality of the word lost to everyday habituation. The
"de-programming" of received trope constituted for Shklovsky the primary
technique of aesthetic language. Poetic estrangement counterbalanced prosaic
habituation, by which complex things and ideas were replaced by shorthand.
Thus, where everyday language followed the laws of energy conservation, poetic
language, according to Shklovsky, expanded energy. It literally belabored
[*zatrudnenie*] and made language difficult again. It prolonged rather than
shortened apprehension [*vospriiatie*] [@shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914]. If, for
Spencer, language was a labor-saving device and poetry its most economical
expression, Shklovsky's idea of poetry was labor-intensive and extravagant.

Any literary innovation was, in the formalist view, bound to follow a cycle of
habituation and renewal. With time, images once able to capture the
imagination lost their vitality. Consequently, the evolution of aesthetic
periods followed a course of arbitrary differentiation, in what Jean Moréas (a
symbolist poet and art critic important for the history of formalism) called a
"cyclical evolution" [*évolution cyclique*], by which dominant tropes in one
period become clichés in the next. Art depletes itself, Moréas wrote, "from
copy to copy, from imitation to imitation." What seems fresh today "dries up
and shrivels" tomorrow [@moreas_symbolisme_1886, 150]. Technique in that sense
was seen by the formalists as a kind of information processing at the
meta-linguistic, social level. The mechanics of "arrangement and the
rearrangement of figure" produced new meaning within habituated contexts. Such
give and take powered the engine of literary development.

In the 1920s, reflecting critically on Shklovsky's "materialist aesthetics"
Mikhail Bakhtin would write that such overly formal, according to him, model
of aesthetic genre formation was capable only of establishing a "chronological
table of variance in the evolution of technical devices," because "in
isolation technique cannot have a history" [@bakhtin_k_2003, 270-1]. The
formalist model of literary development seemed to the more teleologically
oriented critic meandering and meaningless. Bakhtin was also less inclined
towards materialism. He was, for example, careful not to reduce technique to
questions of "material arrangement" alone, independent of the aesthetic idea.
"I am quite ready to join in the sentiment that 'in art technique is
everything,'" he wrote, "provided we understand that the aesthetic object
cannot exist independent of the artistic work" [@bakhtin_k_2003, 308-10]. For
Bakhtin, the work existed neither in the mind nor in matter's configuration
alone.  Any immanent volume of text, an edition of Shakespeare's *Hamlet* for
example, could not, for Bakhtin, exhaust the possibility of *Hamlet* as a
transcendent work of art. Neither could works be reduced to their pure ideas.
Any notion of *Hamlet* the play must rest on firm material foundations---the
textual witness---be it an original folio or critical edition. "In art,
technique is not mechanistic," he wrote. Rather, "technique animates and
motivates the aesthetic object at every point" [@bakhtin_k_2003, 310]. In
effect, Bakhtin denies the dualism between ideational content and physical
form. Idea and objects enter into a continual dialectic.

For Bakhtin, technique was that force which at any point of a text was capable
of translating ideas into things and things into ideas: where the mental
conception of the word materialized into a specific arrangement of ink and
paper. Within the ontological indeterminacy of art, which exists
simultaneously as an object and idea, Bakhtin approximated the following
formula: "audiences are equivalent to creators, minus technique."
Alternatively, authors "equal the audience plus technique" [@bakhtin_k_2003,
373-4]. Audiences experience art's coming into being, though they lack in
craft. Technique in that sense is a "method of processing content through
material" [@bakhtin_k_2003, 249]. We return to the notion of labor or
procedure, which transforms raw material---things---into art, no longer mere
objects limited by their physical manifestations. In this light, the goal of
poetics became, in Bakhtin's words, the analysis of the "technical apparatus
of aesthetic creation:" the movement between works and objects of art and back
from things to ideas [@bakhtin_k_2003, 275]. Hence, aesthetics as dialectics:
the study of transformation.

Even as formalism flirted with the idea of a materialist poetics, the "matter"
of formal analysis was limited to the abstract notion of language, which, as
is the case with any abstraction, can exist only in a categorical sense: in a
way that all whales are mammals, for example. Mammals are not a thing in that
sense. The category of "language" similarly comprises a theoretical aggregate
of specific vernaculars. In giving names to literary phenomena---genres and
periods, for example---literary critics similarly move from material specifics
to categorical abstractions. We can thus view Nabokov's recursive meta-poetics
as a response counter to the critical method of induction. His prose works
deductively, in that it attempts to convert ideas back into things. It
reifies. His pipes and surface inscriptions protrude through the diegetic
limits of the fictional world.

On the way to becoming things, words necessarily encounter the medium's
physical confines. Whatever the diegetic limits of fictional worlds, they are
firmly constrained by paper. Nabokov's prose often reveals the book's
outer-most conceit. Devices in their ideational sense meet devices in their
material. Fictional worlds bump against the real at a page's bounds.

Recall, for example, the conclusion of Nabokov's 1936 *Invitation to a
Beheading*, which ends with the imagined dissolution of diegetic boundaries.
Readers glimpse the material reality "on the other side" of the page.
"Everything was falling," Nabokov wrote:

> A spinning wind was picking up and whirling: dust, rags, chips of painted
> wood, bits of gilded plaster, pasteboard bricks, posters; an arid gloom
> fleeted; and amidst the dust, and the falling things, and the flapping
> scenery, Cincinnatus made his way in that direction where, to judge by the
> voices, stood beings akin to him [@nabokov_invitation_1959, 223].

Nabokov gestures towards the real, arresting mimesis. He exposes the literary
incapacity to actualize, to assume physical form. A book's physics constrain
the novel's. Nabokov drew attention to that boundary throughout his career,
often creating meta-literary characters that understand their predicament and
struggle hopelessly to escape.

Similarly, the material contexts of literary production escape from a reader's
view. Critics struggle to articulate the transition from thought to object.
Technique, the linkage between pen and paper, disappears in reception. Echoing
his Soviet colleagues in his influential *The Craft of Fiction*, the English
critic Percy Lubbock, himself a formalist of sorts, wrote:

> To grasp the shadowy and fantasmal form of a book, to hold it fast, to
> turn it over and survey it at leisure---that is the effort of a critic of
> books, and it is perpetually defeated [...] Nothing, no power, will keep a
> book steady and motionless before us, so that we may have time to examine its
> shape and design [@lubbock_craft_1921, 1].

The author's use of object-oriented vocabulary does not however quite refer to
objects. Lubbock's "grasping," "holding," and "keeping the book motionless"
are metaphors. The reader holds and keeps the thing before the mind's eye.
Books escape the reader's mental, not physical, grasp. Nor do his "books,"
"forms," "shapes," and "designs" refer to the outward, material aspects of the
literary artifact. These are again mental constructions, not material. When he
mentions the book he usually means the novel.

The confusion underscores his thesis. Our unfamiliarity with what Lubbock
calls the novel's "technical aspects" hampers our ability to understand how it
comes to present itself to the mind in its entirety [@lubbock_craft_1921,
272]. Viewers grasp other more plastic art forms like sculpture or painting
whole and at once.[^ln2-herder] These exist synchronically, in space limited
to their physical dimensions. Narratives, by contrast, unfold in time,
diachronically. To perceive a book, to read a novel, we must therefore
abstract from the physical object and extend it in working memory, past
immediate perception. Meaning-making of the sort involves the mental
assemblage of linguistic minutiae, which eventually constitute a literary
whole.

Critical reading in Lubbock's sense entails an account of the transformation
from things to ideas: from words and sentences to stories, novels, and verse.
Echoing Boris Eichenbaum in "How *The Overcoat* is Made," Lubbock was
interested in the mechanics of literary craft---how the thing is made. He
promised to view "a few familiar novels [...] with some particularity," but
without judgement or critique. "How they are made is the only question I shall
ask," he wrote [@shklovksy_poetika_1919; @lubbock_craft_1921, 12, 28;
@eichenbaum_how_1995]. The book's author is "craftsman," he wrote. It is
therefore the critic's role to "overtake him at his work and see how the book
was made" [@lubbock_craft_1921, 274]. Books however "vanish" when we "lay our
hands" on them [@lubbock_craft_1921, 273]. Critics must therefore choose to
see either trees or the forest. As the totality of the work comes into view,
the technical details of craft---books as objects---disappear. Conversely,
when viewed up close, technical particulates obscure sight of the work as a
whole.

"The real heart and substance of the book," Lubbock wrote, "stands out more
clearly for the obscurity into which the less essential parts of it subside"
[@lubbock_craft_1921, 4]. To read in this mode is to deny books their
materiality. When reading for pleasure, lay readers lose themselves in the
elements of narrative immediately available for observation. To read novels
for pleasure for Lubbock is to "forget, if we can, that the book is an object
of art."[@lubbock_craft_1921, 6] By object of art he means the transcendent
idea of the novel as opposed to the immanent work itself. To "objectify"
elements of the novel that "strike us more keenly," as Lubbock phrases it,
therefore means for him quite the opposite of what is usually meant by
objectification. The complete mental idea of the novel congeals only at the
conclusion of reading, that is, at the limits of the book as a thing. "[F]ar
from losing ourselves in the world of the novel," Lubbock argued, "we must
hold it away from us, see it all in detachment, and use the whole of it to
make the image we seek, the book itself" [@lubbock_craft_1921, 6]. But to hold
books away in that sense means also to internalize them completely. And by
"books" he means the idea of a novel, not at all the thing itself. Thus to
read critically is, paradoxically, also to arrest the coming-into-being of the
work. The difficulty of materialist poetics reflects in its language, which
continually conflates mental and physical constructs.

*The Craft of Fiction* ends on an ambivalent note. Lubbock sensed the
inadequacy of his materialism: "if only there were one single tangible and
measurable fact about a book," he wrote. If only it could be "weighed like a
statue" or "measured like a picture---it would be a support in a world of
shadows" [@lubbock_craft_1921, 273-4].

I want to end the section here, with a momentary failure of materialist
poetics, to pick up another concomitant thread, one that will take us through
some of the same concerns about the nature of symbolic representation and its
relationship to the physical world. My aim in this disruption is to disconnect
the history of modern computing from its expected contexts of calculating
machinery and to join it with literary theory, where as we will see, it also
finds a measure of congruity. I do so in the absence of direct evidence for an
explicit intellectual connection.[^ln2-moaran] My goal is not to prove that
such a linkage exists, but rather to irreparably entwine the nominally
discordant intellectual and material genealogies in a way that sheds light on
our modern predicament, where books and guided missiles indeed share the same
semiotic infrastructures. Along with critics of contemporary computational
culture like Bernard Harcourt and Frank Pasquale I would like to ask: How did
we get here [@pasquale_black_2015; @harcourt_exposed:_2015]? The thought of
Ludwig Wittgenstein and his student Alan Turing reveals, along with a number
of broken reading and writing machines, a possible answer to the quandary of
materialist poetics, posed in the liminal space between thought and thing.

## Thought Experiment I

Modern computers---and by extension the electronic book---harken back to a
cluster of related thought experiments prevalent in the philosophy of Ludwig
Wittgenstein and subsequently Alan Turing, his long-time student and
colleague. The story of Turing machines has been told before in many contexts,
but never with an eye towards literary machines. The history of literary
interpretation nevertheless occupies a central place in the early development
of modern computing. To confront computers as literary devices one must first
understand their peculiar relationship to universal Turing machines. I would
like to frame that discussion by drawing two further as yet unexplored
historical genealogies that lead to Turing's seminal essay on computable
numbers: the first intellectual, which stem back to his tutelage under Ludwig
Wittgenstein, and second, material, which highlight the physical similarities
between Turing's design and a number of attendant developments in printing and
communication.

To read Lubbock, Turing, and Wittgenstein together is to recover a legacy of
humanities computing that often gets overlooked in the history of computer
science and software engineering. The literary perspective is important
because it allows us to see the computer in a new light: more than a byproduct
of quantification, a metaphor machine. Turing machines should interest
literary scholars because they embody a minimally viable model for generalized
symbolic manipulation: reading and writing. Poetics should interest electrical
and software engineers for the same reason, because it grounds computation in
the long history of the written word. Turing's thought experiments were meant
to solve a mathematical problem, but their pedigree lies also in the study of
textual meaning-making and interpretation. Wittgenstein and Turing pose a
problem similar to that of the formalists, and arrive at a similar conclusion:
a generalized algorithm for language manipulation.

In his seminal 1936 paper on computable numbers, Alan Turing proposed a
peculiar (for a mathematical treatise) thought experiment that addressed a
problem in the field of elementary number theory [@church_computable_1937].
His solution involved more than a formula. Instead, he imagined a machine that
would substitute for calculation. Ultimately, Turing described a device that
was meant to embody the symbol: it transformed external abstractions into
physical states, internal to the device. In doing so, his imagined machine
breached the boundary between idea and matter. It was exactly an instrument
for transforming thoughts into shapes, of the kind approached by formalist
poetics. In that sense, Turing's hypothetical machine represents an
advancement in the development of a long-standing thought experiment
concerning the nature of human understanding and the beginning of a new,
machine-assisted philological practice.

The question of an "automated" hermeneutics echoes through the canon of
Western philosophic tradition. What does it mean to read and to understand
something?  Is it enough to repeat another's words, as Phaedrus did in
response to Socrates? Could students be said to possess reason when they
merely parrot thoughts, without actively thinking on their own? Would we make
the same conclusions about the possibility of animal or machine intelligence?
The question was posed already by Descartes who wrote that it would not be
sufficient for the "rational soul" to be "lodged in the human body like a
pilot in his ship, except perhaps for the moving of its members," but that
intelligence must be "joined and united more closely with the body in order to
have sensations and appetites similar to our own." Magpies and parrots can
appear to speak, Descartes wrote, but can they show us that they understand
[@descartes_discourse_1996, 36]? And what would that "showing" entail?

Recall also the experiments with combinatorial poetics of the 17th century
German Jesuit scholar Athanasius Kircher, the inventor of *Arca Musurgicae*, a
music composition device, by which a composer not versed in music could
combine predetermined musical phrases written on wooden planks to compose a
score. In correspondence with Kircher, the German Baroque poet Quirinus
Kuhlman argued that using a similar instrument to compose poetry would amount
to *sed versus, non poema* [mere versification, not poetry]. Would we call a
naive child using such a contraption a composer or a poet, he asked?  And
answered:

> *Sed lusus est ingeniosus, Ingeniose Kirchere, non methodus, prima fronte
> aliquid promittens, in recessu nihil solvens. Sine cista enim puer nihil
> potest respondere, & in cista nihil praeter verba intelligit; tot profert,
> quot audit, sine intellectu...*

> But [the poetry box] is just an ingenious game, *Ingenious Kircher*, not a
> method, promising something on the surface, but solving nothing deep down.
> For without the box the boy can answer nothing, and with the box he
> understands nothing but words. He produces whatever he hears, without
> understanding, like a parrot [@gillespie_primal_1978, 32].

The child cannot create without mechanical assistance. Like the parrots of
Plato, Kuhlman, and Descartes it mimics creation on the surface. Nothing in an
automaton's mind corresponds to the outward appearance of thought. The child
composes poetry without thinking---that is, without the appropriate deep
structure that should accompany proper poiesis. If technique alone is to guide
the creation of poetry, in a way that was suggested by the formalists, would
we recognize purely formal creation as art, or thought, or language even? Or
would it be also for us mere versification? Does technique matter in other
words? Do we care how the thing is produced---by machines or aliens---or do we
care only about its effects?

The philosopher John Searle would later pose a similar question in his famous
Chinese Room thought experiment [@searle_minds_1980]. Can a contraption be
said to "speak" a language if inside it contains only a dictionary for looking
up the correct answers to any given query? A man inside the room sorts the
answers blindly. He does not understand the language, yet the contraption
appears to respond appropriately. Is it again enough to appear to understand,
or should we say that understanding must always involve an analogous inward
movement?

Searle argued that his room, a kind of a robot for automated responses in a
foreign language, could not be properly said to speak a language in the way a
fluent speaker can. For Searle and other so-called "internalists," the
external signs of whatever is meant by "speaking" and "understanding" must
correspond to some appropriate internal mental states [@searle_minds_1980].
Plato, Descartes, Kuhlman, and Searle all pose a variation on the same thought
experiment, which, in opposition to mere functionalism, aims to identify deep
structure that characterizes cognitive phenomena, apart from its surface
manifestation. Reading and writing should, these thinkers intuit, leave
something behind. Functional, outward appearances are not enough. A text is
ingested. It leaves a trace. It is "joined and united" with the body, to
paraphrase Descartes. Moreover, the trace must correspond, in some way, to the
originating inscription. The two achieve a measure of structural accordance.

Recall the famous *pharmakon* passage from Plato's *Phaedrus*, which explores
the relationship between writing and its impression on the mind. At the
conclusion of the dialog, King Thamus objects to the technology [*ta tekhnēs*]
of the written word, as he believes it will foster forgetfulness in the people
who use it. Plato writes: "Their faith in extrinsic writing [*graphō
exōthen*], by means of foreign impressions [*allotrion tupōn*] will diminish
their intrinsic [*endothen autous*] capacity to remember."[^ln1-platotr] Plato
thus contrasts the exterior figure of the inscription with memory, an
intrinsic cognitive ability. The Greek *tupōn*, related to the English "type,"
literally means an impression. It is, in this case, also "foreign" or
"othered" [*allotrion*]. It comes from without. Like Moreno after him, Thamus
finds thought externalized through typography problematic. True memory and
thought for him comes from within. It is once again properly internalized.

For this reason, in the beginning of the dialog Socrates asks his young
collocutor to stop reciting a speech that the latter learned by heart.
Recitation is worthless for him. He wants Phaedrus to think for himself and
not merely regurgitate another's ideas. The student must not perform, in other
words, as a mere parrot would or an automaton. To truly comprehend something
and to make a show of it, readers internalize and make their own. Much can go
wrong in that process. We expect for reading to ultimately leave appropriate
impressions [*tupōn*] on the reader's mind. These typographic imprints
presumably correspond to the stamp. For understanding to take place, writing
must produce "true," in Descartes' words, feelings and appetites. But what is
true, appropriate, or proper? What shapes does type [*tupōn*] impress onto the
soul? It cannot be a letter's literal form. How does one then convert external
images [*graphō exōthen*] into internal [*endothen*]? How can we incorporate
foreign [*allotrion*] to us states of mind? How does one ingest inscription in
a way that leaves an appropriate trace? Even the most mundane acts of reading
contain such profound mysteries of comprehension.

## Thought Experiment II

Turing machines, which will come into view shortly, embody a stark solution to
the problem of appropriate comprehension. I propose now to consider them first
within the above broad tradition of formalist poetics and second, more
narrowly, in response to a series of thought experiments proposed by Ludwig
Wittgenstein in the 1930s at Cambridge, where Turing studied in his early
career and later taught.[^ln1-timeline]

Wittgenstein broached the problem of reading machines and comprehension in his
*Blue and Brown Books* and *Philosophical Grammar* (all compiled in the early
1930s), then in his lectures and remarks on the foundations of psychology and
mathematics from the late 1930s, and finally in *Philosophical
Investigations*, written between 1945 and 1949. The earliest of these
documents, *The Blue Book*, opens with a question of semantics. "What is the
meaning of a word?" Wittgenstein asks and cautions his students against
choosing the easy answer, which holds that meaning resides in the head. "It is
misleading then to talk of thinking as of a 'mental activity'", he writes:

> We may say that thinking is essentially the activity of operating with
> signs. This activity is performed by the hand, when we think by writing; by
> the mouth and larynx, when we think by speaking; and if we think by imagining
> signs or pictures, I can give you no agent that thinks. If then you say that
> in such cases the mind thinks, I would only draw your attention to the fact
> that you are using a metaphor, that here the mind is an agent in a different
> sense from that in which the hand can be said to be the agent in writing
> [@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 6-7].

Wittgenstein explains that when we see a sentence on paper we assume that some
structure analogous to that sentence exists in the mind. Perhaps, he
speculates, we could even observe the brain directly, in the process of
writing, to check whether mental states correspond to the inscription, as a
sort of a linguistic Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machine. Both thought
structures, mental and written, embody thought. Yet neither exists in
isolation.

Rather, we are witnessing the workings of a metaphor: the transference of
properties between two distinct physicalities, one in the head and one on
paper. Neither physical nor mental descriptions alone are sufficient for
Wittgenstein to locate cognition. The subject escapes depending on our point
of view. When the hand writes, it is the brain that thinks. But when the hand
thinks, it is the brain that writes. Meaning thus lies in the transition from
hand to head and from mind to paper. We might say that thinking takes place
"on paper, in our head, in the mind," Wittgenstein writes, but crucially,
"[n]one of these statements of locality gives *the* locality of thinking"
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 16]. Thought is rather distributed throughout the
body and among its extensions. We think by the sign, head, hand, and pen.

"Could a machine think?" Wittgenstein asks later on in the first notebook
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 16]. The challenge, as he explains it, is not one of
finding a machine that can do the job---of manipulating signs, for example.
It lies in the ability of the machine to enact both sides of the metaphoric
equation. "Doing the job," to manipulate external signs for example, must
correspond to something else. Severed from its analogical structure, the
"blind" manipulation of signs is a meaningless activity. Meaning, Wittgenstein
suggests, resides in the metaphorical transference between something (symbol)
and something else (machine state). "Can a machine hold private mental
states?" is therefore a better question. Can it feel pain in the sense of pain
being the state of internal affairs not accessible to others
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 16, 46-9]? If we believe machines to be capable of
holding intrinsic states, we can then imagine something akin to machine
intelligence, by which a spoken word or letter finds the appropriate inward
representation for the machine. Understanding, in that sense, lies simply in
the structural accord between something internal and external.

Wittgenstein engages the question of semantics again in his *Brown Notebook.*
He first defines reading mechanically, as an activity devoid of meaning which
involves "translating script into sounds," "writing according to dictation,"
or "copying in writing a page of print." What happens when a naive child reads
a newspaper? Wittgenstein asks, echoing Kuhlman and Descartes. The child's
eyes, he answers, "glide along the printed words, he pronounces them aloud or
to himself," but "other words he pronounces after having seen their first few
letters only, others again he reads out letter by letter." Children act as
"reading machines" when they pay no attention to what they read. A child reads
"faultlessly like a reliable machine," Wittgenstein repeats, emphasising the
mechanical property of colloquially "mechanistic" reading
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 119]. Another hypothetical child merely pretends to
read. It guesses at the words and on occasion repeats things "by heart,"
without actually seeing them on the page [@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 121-22].
Would any of these hypothetical scenarios rise to our conventional
understanding of reading?

Wittgenstein continues to complicate such edge cases. He considers the case of
a hallucinating patient, who "reads" what to us looks like gibberish. Another
fakes reading Cyrillic by memorizing the lines phonetically. He thinks of
machines too which produce random sounds that occasionally, by accident,
correspond to some existing texts. In each case, we envision two mechanisms,
Wittgenstein writes, one visible and external and one hidden and internal. The
reader eventually does more than mimic the mechanical motions of reading.
Outward signs are insufficient to indicate comprehension. The motions---of
gliding one's eyes across the page and saying the words out loud---must
connect in some way to appropriate internal, mental representations.

We are tempted then to privilege the inward-facing signs of comprehension as
the "real criterion for a person's reading or not reading." However, no such
internal mechanisms can be known to us or communicated to others properly
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 120]. We can only intuit a reader's intimate
experience of reading. Absent the ability to convey private mental states
directly, reading pupils must convince their teachers that the scanned sign
had the intended effect through language. This requires even more words. The
hermeneutic circuit is perpetually frustrated. How can Phaedrus convince
Socrates? How can he explain that he understands? Texts beget texts. But what
if the explanation is memorized as well? What can be done to convince others
definitively of our having understood a text properly?

Wittgenstein finally describes something akin to affective hermeneutics---an
"indirect way of transmitting [a] feeling." Communication, we would say today,
is always mediated. In the conclusion of his notebooks, Wittgenstein imagines
the possibility of "direct" modes communication, capable of transmitting
feelings immediately from one person to another, in a way that "obviate[s] the
external medium of communication" [@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 185]. Barring that
possibility, we are ultimately limited by our private sensations of knowledge.
"Something which we can never know happens at the end end," Wittgenstein
writes [@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 185]. Any sense of affirmation, the phatic
utterance---Can you hear me now? Did you understand?---comes through further
expression, entailing further uncertainty.

*Philosophical Grammar,* written around the same time as the *Blue and Brown
Notebooks*, develops the reading experiments further. It begins again with a
problem of "understanding" and "not understanding." "To understand a
language," Wittgenstein writes, means "to take in a symbolism as a whole"
[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 5]. A word is always a part of a larger
system. Similarly, a pass in football (soccer) also only makes sense as part
of the game. It is meaningless in isolation. From the start, Wittgenstein
envisions "understanding" as a type of trans-mediation. In comparing the
understanding of language and music, he writes: "For explanation I can only
translate the musical picture into a picture in another medium and let the one
picture throw light on the other" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 41]. And
elsewhere: "How curious: we should like to explain the understanding of a
gesture as a *translation* into words, and the understanding of words as a
translation into gestures [emphasis mine]."[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974,
42] In conclusion, he again describes what we mean by "understanding" as a
"process of translation from one symbolism into another; tracing a picture,
copying something, or translating into another mode of
representation."[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 45] To understand something
said is thus akin to modeling it in clay or drawing it. Similarly, we imagine
explaining basketball rules to someone who only knows how to play hockey by
analogy: pucks bare grammatical resemblance to balls, goals to basketball
hoops. The symbolic grammar of one game explains the other.

It is insufficient however to merely paraphrase: to show understanding one
must "draw a picture" or "model" in a way that reveals a correspondence of
equivalent structures. Language cannot, in this view, be explained by more
language. We must trade symbolisms to create a model that explains one
representational system in terms of another. The symbolisms cannot diverge
completely either. There must be some productive overlap to account for the
structural similarities between balls and pucks. We would have to explain:
take note of these similarities, but not these---these are incidental.
Language cannot be modelled like clay exactly. The rules of one game unfold by
logics connected to its distinct physicalities: air and clay, ice and asphalt.

In thinking of the various ways in which the translation between divergent
symbolisms breaks, Wittgenstein continually returns to the pianola, a type a
player piano. The pianola joins music score to mechanism in a rigid way.
Mechanism and symbolic notation become one. The machine does not "interpret,"
in that sense. Perforated paper physically actuates the appropriate pins and
gears and always in the same manner, leaving no room for interpretation. As
long as the mechanism functions properly, musical notation and internal
arrangement of instrument parts stand in perfect accord. The connection's
rigidity assures a symbolic correspondence. The machine enacts an exacting
translation from one medium to the next by mechanical means, as the actuating
mechanisms of the player piano fit into the grooves of a music roll (Fig 1.1).

!!! Insert Figure 1.1 here.

The idea of a rigid correspondence seems to bring us closer to solving the
challenge of "proper" comprehension. What if reading could become similarly
rigid, in a way that is impossible to misinterpret? But, like other, less
exacting, mechanisms of comprehension, pianolas too break. Early in
*Philosophical Grammar* Wittgenstein explains: "Aren't our sentences parts of
a mechanism? As in a pianola? But suppose it is in bad condition?"
[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 10] "The sentences that we utter have a
particular purpose," Wittgenstein writes:

> they are to produce certain effects. They are parts of a mechanism, perhaps
> a psychological mechanism, and the words of the sentences are also parts of
> the mechanism (levers, cogwheels and so on). The example that seems to
> illustrate what we're thinking of here is an automatic music player, a
> pianola. It contains a roll, rollers, etc., on which the piece of music is
> written in some kind of notation (the position of holes, pegs, and so on).
> It's as if the written sign gave orders which are carried out by keys and
> hammers [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 69].

As was the case with reading automata in *Blue and Brown Notebooks*,
Wittgenstein again substitutes a physical mechanism for the process of
symbolic interpretation. Words and music notation alike contain a "purpose,"
in his words. They elicit specific "effects" in the mechanism.

But as before, we cannot always expect the mechanism of interpretation to
function properly, nor do we have a reliable way to verify its correct
operation. "But suppose the pianola is in bad condition," Wittgenstein
repeats. The notation could produce "hisses and bangs" instead of music, for
example. One could object that notes are always "meant" to play on a mechanism
in perfect working order. But to explain what is meant by "perfect working
order," we would need to draw yet another diagram or build another machine.
Wittgenstein resorts to yet another analogy. The "sense of an order," he
writes, lies in its "effect on an obedient man"
[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 69-70]. We are not able to escape
subjective hermeneutics. Mechanical sense seems to again lie within
"reasonable" interpretation of the instructions.

When drawing analogies between mental and mechanical processes, Wittgenstein
explicitly rejects the model of language as a "psychophysical" mechanism
[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 70]. Rather, as the title of the work
suggests, Wittgenstein is in search for "grammars" governing the engagement:
between speakers and listeners, readers and writers, player pianos and musical
scores. By the end of the work, grammar emerges as a cheat-sheet, a
conventional protocol: recall the dictionary inside of Searle's room. It
contains the "smarts" of the system. Neither the room nor the person inside
speaks a foreign language. If anything "knows" the language, it is the
dictionary, which allows the system to function.

Wittgenstein thus complicates his mechanistic model by imagining a layer of
rules that mediate between symbol and machine or mental state. We can agree
upon a convention formally, by transcribing into a protocol: a chart of
appropriate correspondences that describes the exact rules of engagement. It
would be then possible to imagine a "part of the mechanism which resembles the
chart," Wittgenstein writes, "inserted between the language-like part of the
mechanism and the rest of it" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 190]. Such
instructions could enforce compliance. One could imagine a warning bell that
sounds, for example, when a musical score falls out of alignment.

"Can one say that grammar describes language?" Wittgenstein writes:

> If we consider language as part of the psycho-physical mechanism which we
use when we utter words---like pressing keys on a keyboard---to make a human
machine work for us, then we can say that grammar describes that part of the
machine.[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 187-8]

The grammar sets up a "connection between a word and 'a thing'," in order for
the mechanism to function in a certain way. "[T]he definition," Wittgenstein
writes, "can make it work properly, like the connection between the keys and
the hammers in a piano." Crucially, it is that "connection and not the effect
which determines the meaning" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 190]. A
programmer would say that Wittgenstein's "grammatical layer" resembles modern
programming language interpreters and compilers, exactly the parts of the
machine that connect codified instructions to their execution.[^ln1-compile]
Similarly, Wittgenstein's grammar "means" in the sense of specifying rules by
which meaning succeeds or fails.  In this way, we can move away from speaking
of "intended effects" or "proper obedience" and rather concentrate on this
interpretive and mediating layer, which describes the rules of engagement
[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 194-6]. To learn a language in that sense
is not to learn individual words, but to understand the mechanical linkages of
meaning-making.

We say that the mechanism is rigid or the law is inexorable when the results
of an action are fixed. Wittgenstein calls such a relationship
"super-hardness" [@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 197]. Where a judge can be
lenient, he explains, the law is compulsory. What we would now call an
"algorithm" compels predictable execution, not subject to the vagrancies of
interpretation [@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 282]. The parts of the
mechanism subsequently exist in a causal relationship to one another. Pushing
this or that lever will always result in such and such movement, because of
the way the mechanical parts are connected.

We are tempted, as before, to privilege the inner workings of a symbolic
mechanism, also at the core of meaning making in mathematics. "If I show you
the mechanism behind the [watch] dial, you will be able to predict the
movement of the hour hand for any given movement of the minute hand,"
Wittgenstein writes. But once again, how do we know if a mechanism is
functioning properly? I may drop the clock, for example, he explains, "so that
the machinery is broken, or a lighting may strike
it."[@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 195] To check the mechanism for damage
we need "a picture," a diagram, or schematics that describe what the properly
functional mechanism looks like. As a schema, the mechanism is itself a type
of a symbol for the perfected behavior of the sort that we expect. We could,
to take another example, compare a broken clock with clocks that work. Where
we tried to find a mechanism behind the symbol, we found also a symbol behind
the mechanism. But again we struggle to complete the circuit of interpretation
between intent and effect, which never quite manage to explain and to verify
each other. How do we know that our "gold standard" clock schematics are
themselves golden, that is that they lead to the construction of properly
functioning clocks? We are again faced with a series of receding analogies: a
diagram that explains a diagram that explains a diagram.

In his lectures on mathematics, Wittgenstein never finds a way out of this
recursive conundrum. The foundations of mathematics rely on some such mutually
dependent relationship between the physical and symbolic worlds. Whether it is
in math or ordinary language, some magic happens at the coupling of matter and
sign. The precise point of contact concerns Wittgenstein in all fields of
human activity, from literature to psychology and mathematics. In all of these
fields, he finds an implicit analogy between "symbol" and "mechanism." A type
of metaphor, the analogy itself is atomic. It cannot be split further into
something like sign and referent, tenor and vehicle, or signifier and
signified. Considered apart, the two parts of a metaphor are strictly
meaningless. In his lectures on aesthetics, Wittgenstein describes the
dependency rather as the "concomitance between mechanism and its trace." The
best we can do in formalizing aesthetics is therefore to "trace [its]
mechanism," Wittgenstein concludes [@wittgenstein_lectures_1966, 13-16].

Wittgenstein's thought experiments do not amount to a cohesive model of
language, communication, art, or mind. They do however contain the seeds of
reading and writing machines later imagined by Alan Turing, at the formative
period of contemporary computing. Wittgenstein's experimental thought machines
prefigure a contemporary conversation about machine intelligence. Wittgenstein
conjures his fantastical broken mechanisms to test the limits of our
intuitions about reading, writing, and comprehension.

## Thought Experiment III

In 1939 Alan Turing attended Wittgenstein's lectures on mathematics at King's
College. From the notes on Wittgenstein's lectures complied and published by
Cora Diamond, it is clear that Turing was a vociferous presence in the class.
His name is mentioned eighty-six times in the text, more than any other
student by a wide margin. At some point of the course Wittgenstein concludes
his lecture in saying: "Unfortunately Turing will be away from the next
lecture, and therefore that lecture will have to be somewhat parenthetical.
For it is no good my getting the rest to agree to something that Turing would
not agree to" [@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 67-8].

One expects Turing's seminal paper on computable numbers, where he first
proposed his universal computing machine, to contain a strictly technical
discussion in the narrow field of number theory. Instead, we encounter a
number of surfeit features that do not fit neatly into mathematics. These
account for the perplexing undercurrent of cognitive theory always present in
Turing's writing. His machines "think," they are "aware," and they "remember,"
where his humans "calculate" and "compute." The cognitive language reflects a
heritage of Wittgenstein's thought, concerned more broadly with theory of mind
and the passage of inscription into understanding. Turing's machine thinks in
a particularly literate way: by ingesting and regurgitating symbols. Turing
inherits these traits from Wittgenstein's menagerie of comprehension automata
in various states of disrepair. In the wilderness of Wittgenstein's thought he
locates the concise coordinates for a universal mechanism, placed at the
liminal space between thing and symbol.

Turing machines mediate in the metaphoric transference from intrinsic "hard"
states to their extrinsic "soft" representations. Like their predecessors,
they concern the grammar of that transformation. They are, ultimately,
mechanisms of exacting obedience: fully deterministic systems that
nevertheless exceed their formal limitations. "How can the rules of operation
of the machine change?" Turing asked in "Computing Machinery and Intelligence"
[@turing_computing_1950, 458]. His answer, which began as a mathematical
proposition in the 1930s, by the 1950s developed into a dramatized
conversation between a poet and her critic; into the possibility of an
evolving artificial intelligence; and into an imitation game, by which
computers misrepresent their assigned gender. The very formulation of Turing
machines poses a number of questions related to the problem of free will and
determinism more broadly. How can a machine escape its programming? How can a
poem transcend the rules of its composition? How do humans become more than
the sum of their nature and nurture?

Turing's universal machine finally distills the diversity of Wittgenstein's
experiments into a single concise formula. It needs the following three
components to function: (a) a notational system that represents machine
states, (b) storage media capable of bearing inscription, and (c) a reading
and writing mechanism to transform notation into machine states. Given these
three characteristics, the machine becomes a universal mechanism, capable of
assuming the function of any other symbolic system.

To understand Turing machines in practical terms, think about the lower limits
of computation. A Turing machine can simulate the physics of using a hammer,
for example, but it cannot ever become one. A smart hammer is one that
contains inscription: rules and instructions for hammering. Turing machines
open a space of interiority, by which mechanical actions (hammering, in our
case) can be traced into their notational equivalents (instructions for
hammering). A smart hammer, or any other smart thing for that matter,
presupposes a system of symbolic exchange within the instrument.

Once assimilated in this way, symbols are subject to grammatical
transformation. Turing machines unfold the logic of instrument use, that is,
their technique. More complicated symbolic logics, which represent higher
level activity like solving physical formulas or writing poetry, are similarly
amenable to Turing simulation, provided a grammar. Technique, if you recall
from our earlier discussion, is a mode of production abstracted from its
material contexts. The extent to which Turing machines penetrate everyday life
belies their involvement in the general mechanisms of such abstraction, beyond
computation. The computer extends its reach broadly not because it quantifies
life, but because much of human cultural and cognitive activity is already
symbolic in nature. The Turing machine is ultimately a tool for universal
symbolic manipulation.

Let us examine the mechanics of a Turing machine more closely. Turing begins
his paper as we would expect from Wittgenstein's student, with a provocative
analogy: "We may compare a man in the process of computing a real number to a
machine which is only capable of a finite number of conditions"
[@turing_computable_1937, 231]. From the start, Turing treats computation,
which we normally consider a complex cognitive process, as a simple mechanism.
To these ends, he proposes a machine "supplied with a 'tape' (the analogue of
paper) running through it, and divided into sections (called 'squares') each
capable of bearing a 'symbol'" [@turing_computable_1937, 231]. Much like a
movie reel, the tape moves through the mechanism one section at a time.

At each point only one section bearing one symbol is "in the machine." "We may
call this square the 'scanned square,'" Turing writes:

> The symbol on the scanned square may be called the "scanned symbol." The
> "scanned symbol" is the only one of which the machine is, so to speak,
> "directly aware" [@turing_computable_1937, 231].

The scanned symbol becomes a part of the machine's internal configuration, or,
to slide into Turing's cognitive vocabulary, a part of its "awareness." The
machine can "effectively remember," Turing argues, the symbols which it has
"seen" and scanned previously [@turing_computable_1937, 231]. Its initial
configuration---the arrangement of tape and scanning apparatus---plus the
scanned symbol determines its behavior. The scanned symbol becomes a part of
machine "memory," whereby symbols are translated into machine states. Today we
would say that the mechanism transforms "software" into "hardware" and the
other way around.

We imagine then a device not unlike a telegraph or a film projector, which
ingests reels of tape. Unlike telegraphs or film projectors, the ingested
symbolic representation becomes, by definition, a part of the machine's
internal state, in a way that telegraph tape or film reels do not when they
pass through telegraphs and film projectors. The film reel and the ticker tape
do not leave a trace, nor do they signify machine states. By contrast, Turing's
tape alters the machine's internal configuration in a way that lasts beyond its
discharge from the mechanism.

In his earlier thought experiments, Wittgenstein also spoke of humans in the
process of reading or doing mathematics as "ingesting" symbols; of the need to
internalize external symbolic states; and of affecting a change in mental
states, on some real and empirically observable neurological level, which
correlates to the symbol. Turing's machine is capable of such ingestion. It
"thinks," "reads," and "remembers" to the extent of its capability to scan and
internalize symbolic notation. In addition to reading, Turing's machine also
writes. He explains that "[i]n some configurations in which the scanned square
is blank (*i.e.* bears no symbol) the machine writes down a new symbol on the
scanned square" [@turing_computable_1937, 231]. It should thus also be capable
of erasing and moving symbols to adjacent squares, one square at a time. The
Turing machine in effect gives us a concise and minimally viable definition of
"reading," "writing," and "becoming aware." These states for Turing involve
the appropriate internalization and subsequent externalization of the symbol,
for both human and machine.

More than a simple scanner, a Turing machine is also capable of altering the
very rules of reading and writing. If we take "reading" to initially entail
"moving our eyes from left to right," we can also imagine notation that stands
for directives like "now move from right to left," or, "skip every other
character." Such directives become a part of the mechanism to determine the
movement of the "reading" and "writing" apparatus along the surface of the
tape. Unlike an analog watch, the mechanism of the Turing machine is not "set
in stone." It is capable of altering its own inner works, where some of the
scanned characters represent symbols to be manipulated and yet others
represent machine instructions, which define the rules for manipulation. Data
and instructions mix into the same input stream.  The instructions are "meant"
for the machine, in the sense that they direct the movement of the reading and
writing heads, which "write," "scan," or "erase" symbols. Today, we would call
such instructions "programs," "applications," or "software." Other outputs are
meant for the human operator, interested in the functional outcomes of the
action.

Just as Turing machines are able, in theory, to convert extrinsic signs into
intrinsic machine states, they can conversely enact the opposite movement, by
representing machine states symbolically. This remarkable property allows for
what Turing calls a class of *universal* machines, distinct from mere
single-purpose computers. Single purpose Turing machines perform singular
actions like addition or multiplication. The multiplication machine cannot,
however, perform other types of symbolic manipulation---like spell check, for
example---because the physical movement of its internals is fixed. An
electronic weight scale, to take another example, cannot process text or
calculate missile trajectories. The universal Turing machine by contrast has
the ability to internalize other machine configurations, wholesale. Such a
machine can, in Turing's words, "compute any computable sequence"
[@turing_computable_1937, 241]. In being able to internalize physical
configuration as symbol, the universal Turing machine gains the ability to
simulate all other single-purpose Turing machines, as long as the logic of
these machines is amenable to symbolic representation. For this reason, Turing
computation excludes non symbolic mechanical actions like hammering nails or
harvesting grain. The universal Turing machine is a tool for ubiquitous
symbolic manipulation; it is a trace of a trace; a diagram of diagrams.

The transition of symbols into machine states (and the other way around)
defines modern programming. Unlike other, definitive, single-purpose and
limited-state mechanisms (a clock for example), a universal machine contains
the ability to take on differing internal symbolic configurations. It can
imitate a clock, an abacus, a scale, a book. In a later paper that links
computing machinery to intelligence, Turing implied also that his machine
could eventually simulate human thought, because he saw the mind as another
mechanism for manipulating symbols [^ln1-compete]. Are minds just types of
Turing machines or are Turing machines a kind of mind? Turing leaves the door
open for either possibility. The universal Turing machine finally encapsulates
a model of computation itself. It is capable of computing anything computable.
In substituting the concept of computability with "effective computability"
Turing's paper belongs to the annals of mathematical theory. It continues to
elicit conflicting responses widely because much of it contains also the
excess of symbolic thought, related to our more general sense of it it means
to read, write, and think. Besides offering mathematical proofs, Turing's work
embarks on an experimental, ludic even, enterprise in the spirit of
Wittgenstein's playful experimentation, which often involved altered states of
mind, drugs, delirium, madness, and outright deception.

## Device

Literature in computer science tends to treat Turing machines as algorithms:
logical, not necessarily physical constructs. It is impossible however to
dissociate the implementation from the idea. The historian Thomas Haigh wrote
that Turing machines "abstract away from the complexity of real computer
architectures" [@haigh_actually_2014, 241]. It appeals to the theorist because
it is a theory. Haigh notes also that "hardware and software are
interchangeable to the theorist, but not to the historian"
[@haigh_actually_2014, 241]. In his 1937 review of Turing's "On Computable
Numbers" paper, Alonzo Church, the American mathematician whose work
anticipated Turing's (independently) in several important aspects, would
similarly acknowledge the material foundations of Turing computing. A "human
calculator, provided with pencil and paper and explicit instructions, can be
regarded as a kind of Turing machine," he wrote [@church_computable_1937,
42-3; also cited in @petzold_annotated_2008, 63]. Disregarding the broader,
metaphysical implications of that statement, note for now the persistence of
two implements required for the minimally viable operation of the
Church-Turing human and machine calculators. Pen and paper assert themselves
through the abstraction.[^ln1-abstraction]

To encounter digital books and therefore Turing machines as devices, media and
book historians will find that they borrows from a number of extant designs,
which, together and incrementally, give universal Turing machines their
physical form. What are their technological antecedents? What would happen,
for example, if Turing attempted to patent his device? What prior art would he
cite in his patent application?

Most of the minimal technical requirements to build a universal Turing machine
were within reach in the 1930s, at the time when Turing authored his
influential paper. In practice, his proposal would require first an apparatus
capable of "scanning" and "erasing" a "finite number of symbols." Second, it
called for what Turing described as "one-dimensional paper," divided into
discrete squares "like a child's arithmetic book."[^ln1-infinite] Furthermore,
Turing specified a mechanism to advance tape through the machine, or,
alternatively, to propel the scanning mechanism along a length of tape.
Having assembled these elements, our creation would look roughly like a cross
between a telegraph, film projector, and typewriter.[^ln1-davey]

Were one to patent the Turing machine in the United States, at the time of its
invention, the above elements would find prior art in mechanisms such as the
"Numeral adding or subtracting attachment for type-writing machines,"
"Combined Type-writing and Computing Machine," "Computing Attachment for
Typewriters," "Computing Mechanism," and "Combined Type-writing and Adding
Machine" among others [@daugherty_numeral_1894; @degener_combined_1911;
@wright_computing_1914; @wright_computing_1915; @ellis_combined_1914]. All of
these devices contain some combination of reading and writing "heads," storage
tape, and movement mechanism as per Turing's specifications. A number of
inventions at the end of the nineteenth century relate specifically to
"circuit-controlling devices controlled by a traveling perforated strip or
tape," as is the case with tape-driven telegraph transmitter filed by Charles
Cuttriss in 1893 [@cuttriss_telegraphy_1893].

Prior to perforated tape, the transmission of messages by telegraph required
the presence of a skilled operator, able to transcribe messages from text to
Morse code, and into the physical motion of a lever-operated circuit. In the
operation of early telegraphy, human operators acted as mute interpreters
between text and telegraph. The perforated tape decoupled humans from
machines. In US patent #1187035 (1916) on "Telegraphy", brothers Albert and
Ralph Bumstead explain: "the object of our invention is to provide a system of
telegraphy which does not require skilled operators for the transmission and
reception of messages."[@bumstead_telegraphy_1916] Instead, the message was
transcribed into perforation via mechanical means and then fed into the
mechanism. Typewriter's tape movement could then be coupled with telegraph
electronics, where perforated tape mediated between the two "worlds" of
mechanics and electricity. A number of contraptions emerged at the time with
the aim of transfiguring mechanical action into perforation, and,
consequently, perforation into script, completing the circuit between
automated "encoding" and "decoding." These included machines for
tape-controlled telegraphic transmission, tape-controlled printing, printing
telegraphs, and remote broadcast programming devices for radio and television
content [@wheatstone_improvement_1874; @murray_tape-controlled_1905;
@bumstead_telegraphy_1916; @creed_printing_1911;
@hallden_printing-telegraph_1929; @vriendt_program_1934;
@brown_automatic_1936; @brown_selective_1936].

With the invention of punch cards and perforated tape (also used in textile
looms, as early as 1725), a message meant for another human became also a
physical medium---bumps and holes---used to animate the mechanical movement of
the transmission apparatus, the kind of rigid linkage Wittgenstein described
in his thought experiments. Indeed, of the 33 asserted claims in the
"Telegraphy" patent by the Bumstead brothers, the first 13 relate to the
transmission of intelligence:

> [...] adapted to initiate a succession of electrical impulses all of which
> have a character representing significance, a receiver adapted to detect
> variations in the time intervals elapsing between successive impulses, a
> plurality of interpreting relays selectively actuated by said receiver, and a
> printing mechanism responsive to the combined action
> [@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 13-4].

What began as a description of a communication mechanism, concluded with a
claim about hermeneutics of control. Starting with clause 14, the brothers
describe a telegraph system capable of transmitting impulses at varying time
intervals. In the language of the patent, the length of a time interval
"represent[s] significance," involving an automated receiver responsible for
"distributing, interpreting, and recording."[@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 14]
The printing mechanism is further "arranged to print the interpretation of the
signals."[@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 6] Interpreting relays thus transform
time intervals into typography, representing letters, figures, and other
characters, in "accordance with a code." [@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 13]
Initially, the telegraph "interprets" with the aim of "transmitting
intelligence." [@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 12]

Subsequently, the authors understood also that a length of transmitted time
interval could also signify information used to actuate a variety of devices.
The brothers thus refer to their invention in broad terms, calling it a
"controlling medium," capable of regulating remotely everything from
typesetting machines to generic sunflower switches.  "Indeed, the detector and
interpreting relays could be made to actuate a set of sunflower switches for
an indicator [...] without including a printer at all," they conclude
[@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 12]. What starts out as a communication device, by
the end of the patent is generalized into a universal control mechanism.

Driven by ticker tape and connected to printers, automated telegraphs
contained all the necessary Turing features: a discrete symbolic language,
removable storage media, and a mechanism capable of altering its physical
states according to instruction. These proto-computers read and wrote; they
ingested tape and converted extrinsic symbols into intrinsic configurations of
the mechanism. By 1905, Donald Murray, inventor of the popular Murray
telegraph, could write that "[i]f we disregard the small class of telegrams
that merely express emotions, *the essence of telegraphy is control* [emphasis
mine]." He stressed that telegraph systems "belong, not to the class of
producing or distributing, but to the class of controlling mechanisms."
[@murray_setting_1905, 556] For the automated telegraph, control code and
message are one. The mechanism "interprets" some signals as data to be
manipulated and others as control code, the rules for such data manipulation.
The first type of code holds significance for humans, where the second for the
mechanism itself. The mechanism "transmits intelligence" in the sense of
rarefying machine states; it "interprets" in the sense of mechanical
embodiment.

Computing scales, dial recorders, electric tabulating machines, and computing
typewriters were widely available on the market, made by companies like
Underwood Computing Machine, Electromatic, and International Business Machines
(IBM). Rather than a single eureka moment, the invention of the computer
should therefore be viewed as a gradual historical process that culminates in
Turing's universal and minimally viable specifications.

The limits of physical engineering pull the Turing machine back to the sphere
of the applied.[^ln1-cs] What are we to make of universal Turing machines
implemented in virtual worlds like *Wireworld* (a cellular automaton
simulation), or *Minecraft* (a procedurally generated sand-box
world-exploration game)? In the least, we must admit that such simulations do
not rest on the immaterial "turtles all the way down," unless that is, one
believes that the universe itself is a type of Turing computation
[@deutsch_quantum_1985; @lloyd_ultimate_2000; @piccinini_computational_2007].
At some point, the Turing machine in the virtual world meets the material
limits of the physical. Simulation engines like *Minecraft* and *Wireworld* do
in some sense exist in the abstract, as code or even rules written on paper.
In another sense, they do not. They come fully into being when instantiated
within first-order physical constrains that involve actual circuit boards and
relay switches, or, in the least, pen and paper. For this reason, the
performance (in terms of cycles per second, instructions per cycle, or its
capacity to hold a number of instructions) of a Turing machine simulated
within a virtual world like *Minecraft* cannot logically exceed the
performance of the machine running *Minecraft* itself. The physical
capabilities of the bottom-most device limit the computational power of all
*n+1* order Turing simulations. The bottom-most turtle may have its head in
the clouds, but its feet rest firmly on the ground.

The exact plane where the symbolic meets the material is difficult to
identify.  At some imperceptible point software disappears into hardware. Such
ambiguity leads to controversy in the critical literature, as evidenced by Lev
Manovich's playful response to Kittler's "there is no software" argument, in
which the latter posits what he calls the "postmodern writing scene." "[W]e do
not write anymore," Kittler writes. "[H]uman-made writing passes through
microscopically written inscriptions which, in contrast to all historical
writing tools, are able to read and write by themselves."[@kittler_there_1995]
Kittler sees the paper-bound blueprints for the first integrated
microprocessor as the last "real" piece of writing. Everything written after
that point is hardware, because all digital modes of representation, including
text, ultimately rest on physical circuit architecture. The inability to
understand hardware, in this view, precludes all higher modalities of reading,
writing, and interpretation.

Manovich inverts Kittler's argument into "there is only software," by which he
means that in a pragmatic sense, software determines the properties of any
media object. The inversion participates in the perpetual dialectics between
idealism and materialism: Hegel and Marx, Marx and Gramsci, Gramsci and
Kittler, Kittler and Manovich. "[W]hat you can do with the same digital file
can change dramatically," depending on the software, Manovich writes. When it
comes to digital photographs, to use his example, one application may allow
the photographer to crop the image while another may not
[@manovich_there_2011, 273]. From this property-determining aspect of software
(and in reference to the work of Alan Kay), Manovich adopts the concept of the
*metamedium*, "a medium that can dynamically simulate the details of any other
medium" [@kay_computer_1984, 59, qtd. in @manovich_software_2013, 105-6].
Software defines the properties of digital manipulation, determining the
physics of all higher-order media it simulates [@manovich_software_2013,
150-1].

Kittler, would perhaps object that all such higher-order, simulated physics
rest on the bedrock of silicon. In opening a series of nested software black
boxes, the post-silicon writer and scholar of software hits the impenetrable
casket of chip architecture. Manovich's observations hold true for all
simulated media, but not for the simulation itself; hardware that gives rise
to simulation is not in itself one. Base media ultimately determine the
properties of software, their derivative meta-media.

Wittgenstein's thought experiments do not let us fall definitively into the
software or hardware camp. The Turing machine remains in flux, within the
transformation of signs into physical states. We return finally to the sheer
alienness of the book as a piece of telecommunication technology, captured in
the struggle to behold the epistemic object---recall Shklovsky, Lubbock, and
Bakhtin, in the earlier sections. Writing already converts mental states into
arbitrarily externalized marks on paper. Such inscriptions persist, through
time, beyond their biological origin. They are then conveyed remotely and
through ingestion, commonly called "reading:" an action that transforms the
inscription back into a mental state. The intellectual history of Turing
machines leads us to a series of thought experiments about the nature of such
transformations. The question of technique continues to haunt contemporary
poetics. In the process of reading, the book escapes the interpreter's grasp
as a thing, presenting itself only as an idea.

What does the material history of the computer mean for the history of the
book? In viewing the book as a precursor to a generalized machine for symbolic
manipulation we discover that it belongs to a class of controlling devices.
The very nature of Turing machines implies an irreversible admixture of
matter, content, and control structure. When reading a paper-and-cloth book,
one can definitively isolate a) the medium from b) content and from c) the
legal and political structures governing its production. To separate these
components, one could, for example, tear out the copyright notice along with
the ISBN number, copy the words into a notebook, and recycle the paper.

The literary device, by contrast, ingests both symbolic representation and
control code through the same input stream. Where images of governance (like
trademark and copyright symbols) signify control, computed text embodies it.
We are not able to fully separate the medium from its message. Mechanisms of
copyright enforcement are embedded into the device. The content is
inextricably intertwined with the medium. One could copy and paste it, but the
action would miss layers of meaning not accessible at the surface.

In asking "How is it made?" we arrest the advance of symbolism in an attempt
to find the thing behind the process of signification, which always dissembles
to conceal its material foundations. Signification ultimately terminates at
the physical boundaries of its establishing medium. Base conditions differ
from paper to screen. Paper pages contain no internal states to speak of. The
kind of symbolism they supports therefore proceeds from the surface
inscription towards the reader. Reading, as Moreno reminds us, is already an
invasive procedure. Absent human contact, we take on the mental states of
others through a vehicle that conveys a remote kind of agency, displaced in
time and space. It should be held in view all the more because the electronic
book, unlike paper, does contain internal states of its own which further
interject in the process of signification. How is it made becomes a question
not only for the poetics but also for the politics of reading.

The question of technique seeks to expose the rules of symbolic transference
between at least three discrete systems: one inorganic, the book, one
symbolic, text, and one biological, body. There is of course a way in which
the three are one: we are all cyborgs in a sense---an assemblage of organs,
instruments, and inscriptions. In another sense, poetics asks us to consider
the constructed nature of the coupling: the point of contact being governed by
rules of engagement, protocols, grammars, and translation tables. These
constructed entities grow and proliferate in a seemingly organic, ad-hoc
manner. They comprise a part of our received technological a priori. This does
not mean however that they should be naturalized or treated with a reverence
afforded to endangered species or to nature itself. To decouple ourselves from
inscription, if only momentarily---to reject the graft or to let it
wither---must remain an option. If poetics lays the grounds for
interpretation, we must acknowledge that today, such grounds lie past the
digital page's visible simulacrum.

Where literary technique is concerned with the passage of ideas to ink,
computational technique extends the chain of signification also to pixel and
transistor. Techniques of the body and literary techniques intertwine in the
process of conventional reading. The two couple ever tighter when reading
electronically. Miniaturized, the Turing machine passes into the body---think
of a digital pacemaker, for example, an inscription within the machine within
the body. These linkages are deeply embedded. They require explication,
underscoring the continual importance of poetics.

In the process of textual production, printing, and typesetting, it is certain
that my message was packaged with control codes that, in turn, have changed
the structure of the reading device: in a lap, at hand, near the eye. I could
believe that I bear no responsibility for extending the reach of machine
languages so close to the reader; I only wrote the content; I am not
responsible for those other inscriptions. But that would be factually
incorrect. The choice of our writing implements and channels of communication
affect deeply the contexts of interpretation. Such choices, in aggregate,
define the shared ecosystem of knowledge production. Traditional strategies of
close reading which limit interpretation to the parsing of visible content
risk missing the concealed machinations of naked circuit control. It looks
like we are reading books, but this book may change depending on the reader's
race, gender, ethnicity, geography, or political affiliation. Who authors or
authorizes these transformations? Were books also pills or fused with the
brain's neural circuitry, would we know what and whom we were reading?

<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->

[^ln1-compile]: I am forgoing the distinction between interpreters and
compilers for simplicity's sake. See @elbourn_evolution_1962, 1060;
@mccarthy_lisp_1962; @bashkow_system_1967; @neuhold_formal_1971, 95.

[^ln1-consensus]: Lapsed consent is a common theme in the works of Thomas
Hobbes, John Locke, and John Stuart Mill. To paraphrase, they ask: What makes
whatever voluntary compacts made by past generations still valid today?

[^ln1-cope]: See for example @copeland_what_2000 and
@wagner_wittgenstein_2005.

[^ln1-compete]: "We may hope that machines will eventually compete with men in
all purely intellectual fields" [@turing_computing_1950, 460].

[^ln1-cs]: Two separate departments offering competing degrees in software
engineering and computer science is a common occurrence in North American
universities.

[^ln1-davey]: Mike Davey built and displayed a similar instrument at Harvard
University's Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments in 2012. He
writes: "My goal in building this project was to create a machine that embodied
the classic look and feel of the machine presented in Turing’s paper.  I wanted
to build a machine that would be immediately recognizable as a Turing machine
to someone familiar with Turing's work" [@davey_turing_2012].

[^ln1-descartes]: Descartes writes in his 1637 *Discourse on Method*: "If
there were such machines having the organs and the shape of a monkey or some
other animal that lacked reason, we would have no way of recognizing that they
were not entirely of the same nature as these animals; whereas if there were
any such machines that bore a resemblance to our bodies and imitated our
action as far as this is practically feasible, we would always have two very
certain means of recognizing that they were not at all, for that reason, true
men." Also quoted in @dennett_can_2004, 297.

[^ln2-fact]: See for example Osip Brik's "Against Creative Individualism" and
Shklovksy's "On Authorship and Production" in @chuzhak_literatura_2000.

[^ln2-herder]: Lubbock collapses somewhat the difference between painting and
sculpture. See for example @herder_sculpture_2002.

[^ln1-infinite]: A true universal Turing machine would require a tape that is
infinitely long. See @turing_computable_1937, 249.

[^ln1-inside]: Note that these are also minimal physical requirements for
interpretation: the ability to internalize and to externalize symbolically. My
definitions do imply a sort of a dualism, but not between mind and
body---simply between inside and outside, self and other, I and not-I.  This
has been said before in many ways.

[^ln1-kant]: Or at least proceeding as if one has agency to structure one's own
experience, despite the overwhelming evidence for determinism.

[^ln2-moaran]: There is evidence that Ludwig Wittgenstein, the subject of this
section, read Russian and that he visited the Soviet Union in the 1930s. Both
he and Shklovsky fought in Galicia at the Eastern Front although there is no
evidence that the two men met nor knew of one another's work. See
@moran_wittgenstein_1972.

[^ln1-normal]: The process of normalization continues today as contemporary
technologies like natural language processing and optical character recognition
struggle to bring non-regularized writing systems under the computational
umbrella.

[^ln1-notquite]: To what extent a personal computer is a Turing machine is
matter of contention. The Turing machine is a *thought experiment* that
imagines a machine. The PC is a machine emulating the thought experiment. See
@putnam_representation_1988, 121-5; @chalmers_does_1996; @petzold_code:_2000. A
more detailed discussion follows in 1.2.

[^ln1-pop]: See for example @drucker_digital_2001; @golumbia_cultural_2009;
@marche_literature_2012.

[^ln2-shklov]: I rely on the Russian originals throughout, but will cite the
English translations where possible as well. See @shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914;
@shklovksy_poetika_1919; @shklovksy_art_2012.

[^ln1-turing]: The intellectual history of the Turing machine is well
established, in multiple works on the subject. It follows the Greek Diophantus,
René Descartes, Georg Cantor, David Hilbert, Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell,
Kurt Gödel, Ludwig Wittgenstein [@petzold_annotated_2008;
@herken_universal_1988; @grattan-guinness_development_1981].

[^ln1-turingcog]: Turing's later work suggests that his use of cognitive
language throughout "On Computable Numbers" was not accidental, and that he
meant it to define sentience more generally [@turing_computing_1950].

[^ln1-abstraction]: This is a topic of some contention in the literature. In
his influential paper on the topic, James Moor includes the immateriality of
software as one of the "three myths" of computer science: "as a practical
matter what we regard as computer instructions, and consequently what we
regard as computer programs, is determined by the computers available," he
writes [@moor_three_1978, 215]. Nurbay Irmark argues that software is instead
a purely abstract artifact, akin to a musical work [@irmak_software_2012]. See
also @turner_programming_2013; @colburn_software_1999.

[^ln2-moreno]: Moreno is remembered today as a pioneer of group therapy and an
early critic of Freud and socialism. Sociologists have also recently
rediscovered his formative work on network analysis. His books contain
beautiful diagrams, sprouting nodes and edges, with titles like "Structure of
a Cottage Family," "A Handicraft Group," and "The Civilian Social Atom."
Moreno was also a humanist and a philosopher of technology and culture. In
opposition to eugenics, a popular philosophy at the time, his answer to "Who
Shall Survive?" was "everyone." [@moreno_who_1953, 245]

[^ln1-tech]: *Technology* overtakes *technique* around 1979, judging by the
relative frequency of occurrence in the Google Books n-gram corpus
[@michel_quantitative_2011].

[^ln1-timeline]: To give you a sense of the timeline: Turing entered King's
College in 1931 [@hodges_alan_1983, 78]. His paper on computable numbers
appeared in print in 1936. It is likely that the two philosophers met at the
Moral Science Club, where by the 1930s Wittgenstein "monopolized the
discussion," even in the presence of prominent philosophers like George Edward
Moore [@duncan-jones_g._1958, 25]. Turing attended Wittgenstein's lectures on
the foundations of mathematics in 1939.

[^ln1-platotr]: @plato_euthyphro._1999 I translate the passage into literal
English to preserve characteristics notable in the original. In particular,
note the parallelism between *exōthen* and *endothen*, the ambiguity of
*allotrion*, as something that comes from another, and the subtle slide
between *graphō* (letter, figure, writing) and *tupōn* (type, impression,
trace). I extend my gratitude to Stathis Gourgouris, Simos Zenios, and Guy
Smoot for their help with the Greek translations.

\newpage
