## Chapter 2: Laying Bare the Device (The Modernist Roots of Computation)

"The weakest point in our present day universe is the incapacity of man to
meet the machine, the culture conserve, or the robot, other than through
submission, actual destruction, and social revolution" [@moreno_who_1953,
233]. So wrote the Austrian-American psychiatrist, Jacob L. Moreno between the
years of 1934 and 1953, in his idiosyncratic, sprawling, and now seldom read
volume, *Who Shall Survive?* He is remembered today as a pioneer of group
therapy and an early critic of Freud and socialism. Sociologists have also
recently rediscovered his formative work on network analysis. His books
contain beautiful diagrams, sprouting nodes and edges, with titles like
"Structure of a Cottage Family," "A Handicraft Group," and "The Civilian
Social Atom." Moreno was also a humanist and a philosopher of technology and
culture. In opposition to eugenics, popular at the time, his answer to "Who
Shall Survive?" was "everyone" [@moreno_who_1953, 245].

Humanity, according to Moreno, faces two major threats: first embodied in the
aggression from other human beings, and second, in the aggression of robots
or, what Moreno alternatively calls the "cultural conserve" and the
"zootechnical animal" [@moreno_who_1953, 237]. Robots for Moreno encompass all
devices, social structures, and products of the mind that diminish creativity.
With time, "technical devices" and the "methods in the making of cultural
products" are inherited and "used with less friction." For Moreno, technology
is first and foremost a labor-saving device, creativity being the single most
important kind of labor. When the effort of creativity is diminished
significantly, humans begin to "neglect and abandon the genuine and
outstanding creative process." The robot leads to the extinguishing of "all
the active, living moments," striving towards the "illusion of the finished,
perfected product" [@moreno_who_1953, 233]. This illusion reduces humans to
"machine-addicts," residing in a "jungle of robots" that threatens to
suffocate all spontaneous activity. Through robots, life then becomes a
script.

In the name of comfort, safety, and prolonged life, technocracy disempowers
the very subjects whose lives it claims to preserve. The zootechnical animal
exchanges the human capacity for self-determination for the promised certainty
of a better future. Moreno writes:

> The eugenic dreamer and the technological dreamer have one idea in common to
substitute and hasten the slow process of nature. Once the creative process is
encapsulated in a book it is *given*; it can be recapitulated eternally by
everybody without the effort of creating anew.  Once a machine for a certain
pattern of performance is invented a certain produce can be turned out in
infinite numbers practically without effort [...] Once that miraculous eugenic
formula will be found a human society will be given prefect and smooth at
birth, like a book off a press [@moreno_who_1953, 236].

Like king Thamus from Plato's *Phaedrus*, Moreno distrusts rote mechanization
of thought itself. All mechanisms fall under suspicion, instrumental and
institutional including the plow, the pen, the book, the typewriter, the gun,
the rocket, and the atomic bomb, radio and television, central planning,
corporate governance, and legal codex [@moreno_who_1953, 237-44]. Contrary to
my intuitions, this list places both books and bombs at the same level of
analysis. For Moreno, both instruments are similar in that they embody a
detached form of human agency. They both seem to act on their own accord. With
time, volition so detached and animated begins to govern without consensus or
comprehension. Splintered from its source, the robot staggers forth,
*golem*-like, through books, laws, and social institutions. Near immortal,
images of the past proliferate and crowd out the present. Moreno writes:

> Once off the press, the parent, the producer, the author is immaterial; the
> book goes to all places and to all people, it does not care where it is read
> and by whom. Many robots have further in common the attribute of comparative
> immortality. A book, a film, an atomic bomb, they do not perish in the human
> sense, the same capacity is always there, they can be reproduced *ad
> infinitum* [...] Our human world is increasingly filled with robots and
> there seems to be no end to new forms and new developments
> [@moreno_who_1953, 239].

In the aftermath of World War II, Moreno expanded the first edition of his
book to consider the ultimate automaton, the atomic bomb. "Mankind has been
awakened from a dream," he writes. The atomic bomb gives humanity a glimpse of
its common enemy. A mindless agent in possession of detached human volition,
it competes with living actors for survival. Once in motion, robots---books
and bombs---continue to do their bidding blindly. They survive and continue to
shape the social and the mental worlds to come. Moreno explains:

> Many of the domesticated robots are blessed with the attribute of becoming
> labor-saving devices, which has, however the unpleasant consequence that
> they at times reduce the need for creating, promoting with leisure also
> inertia. [...] Many of the robots have also the attribute in common of being
> able to affect human beings or other "targets at a distance," a book, a
> radio or a television sender can entertain or teach at a distance, like a
> gun, a rocket and an atomic bomb can kill people and destroy at a distance.
> The book is a robot par excellence [@moreno_who_1953, 238].

For Moreno, the inertia of past decisions embodied in extant mechanisms
ultimately poses a threat for human survival. In this view, the real
competition for survival happens not between persons, sects, races, or
nations, but between humanity and its automatons. To compete with the robot
humans must expand their capacity for creation. Creative spontaneity is the
one advantage they have over the zootechnical animal. The robot responds with
repetition, leading to indolence. It eases the burden of creativity, weakening
the capacity for poiesis. Moreno's therapy practice was therefore based on the
principle of creative spontaneity training, or "psychodrama," aimed at the
construction of communities that acknowledge and preserve a sense of personal
agency. As far as I can tell from the records, the practice involved group
improvisation and role-play, in what Moreno called the "techniques of freedom"
[@moreno_who_1953, 8].

Moreno's jarring parallelism between books and bombs reminds the reader that
both constitute a species of autonomous agents, a problem long in the
background of Western liberal thought.[^ln1-consensus] In a strange way, both
print and weaponry represent the human volition displaced in time and space.
The projectile acts at a distance; once launched, it will complete its grim
mandate even if the command to act is withdrawn. Technology of the word
similarly decouples readers from writers. The book persists to mean in the
absence of the author. Once decoupled, seemingly autonomous agents---books,
folders, documents---clutter the social sphere, continuing to structure human
experience in the absence of the originating accord. Knowledge, in Plato's
terms, begins to be replaced with the simulation or imitation [ὁμοίωμαi] of
knowledge [@plato_plato:_1999, 250a-b]. The above might appear a curious way
of putting things, but not unusual in the larger context of post-Kantian
humanism at the turn of the twentieth century. In Moreno's words we hear more
than an echo of Marx's critique of the fetishism of commodities, a dynamic by
which "definite social relation between men" assumes "the fantastic form of a
relation between things" [@marx_capital_1967, 72]. Moreno arrives at a similar
conclusion by another logic. In creating some of the earliest examples of
social network graphs, he finds (and objects to) the presence of things in the
position of social actors.

Moreno helps us see the book in a new light. If it was always, as he
suggested, a robot for enacting action at a distance, it is all the more
robotic as a device that draws electricity, an electronic book. When in the
1930s one could view Moreno's rhetoric about books and bombs as a
fanciful---technophobic even---view of literary technology, a century later
his concern appears pressing and prescient. The unintended consequences of
automated and disembodied agency, from artificially intelligent personal
assistants to market trading algorithms, worry scientists, legislators, and
philosophers. What looks like a book today indeed takes on the functions of a
gun and a trigger. Electronic books read on mobile phones, tablets, and
personal computers comprise a part of the same digital infrastructure that
powers drones and aircraft carriers. Today, computers in the service of the
world's largest purveyors of literature are also used by air traffic control
and covert intelligence agencies [@soyata_combat:_2012;
@logicworks_government_2015]. A cellular phone, once a device used solely for
voice telecommunication, is now used ubiquitously both to read books and to
detonate explosives at a distance.

These conditions compel us---historians, philologists, et al.---to reconsider
the cozy relationship we have had with books since the advent of the Gutenberg
press. Simulated text no longer plays by the same rules as print. The
bibliographic illusion veils machine internals. My task in this chapter will
be to illuminate the blueprint of computation within the electronic book. In a
reciprocal movement, I aim also to place the modern computer itself within the
long history of the book, as a piece of literary (and not just mathematical)
technology. To achieve these tasks, I will construct a short prehistory of the
literary device, based on materials roughly from the first half of the
twentieth century. I am interested in the simultaneous emergence of the
literary device as formal technique, a series of thought experiments, and
finally an instrument that lies at the modernist origins of contemporary
computational culture.

### 2.1 Technique

What kind of a *thing* is a literary *device*? The formal concept of a device,
used widely in literary studies, is in part an artifact of an unfortunate
translation from the Russian *priem*. The word would be better translated as
"technique," in the sense of "method," "approach," or "procedure." Device
contains these meanings as well, but in modern usage, it often carries a more
concrete connotation, as "an object, machine, or piece of equipment that has
been made for a special purpose" [@_device_2016]. "Laying bare the device,"
for Viktor Shklovsky, the Russian formalist critic who coined the phrase at
the turn of the century, meant making explicit the implied mechanisms of
literary trope, particularly in cases where such tropes turn "stale,"
"automatic," and "naturalized," that is, bereft of their original poetic and
evocative power [@shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914; @shklovksy_poetika_1919;
@shklovksy_art_2012].[^ln2-shklov]

Vladimir Nabokov, a writer conspicuously aware of his literary--theoretical
heritage, used the formal technique of "laying bare the device" often and with
relentless clinical precision. In the short story "A Guide to Berlin," to
which D. Barton Johnson attributes our first glimpse at Nabokov's "mature
virtuoso style," Nabokov writes:

> In front of the house where I live, a gigantic black pipe lies along the
outer edge of the sidewalk. A couple of feet away, in the same file, lies
another, then a third and a fourth---the street's iron entrails, still idle,
not yet lowered into the ground, deep under the asphalt. For the first few
days after they were unloaded, with a hollow clanging, from trucks, little
boys would run on them, up and down, and crawl on all fours through those
round tunnels, but a week later nobody was playing anymore and thick snow was
falling instead; and now when, cautiously probing the treacherous glaze of the
sidewalk with my thick rubber-heeled stick, I go out in the flat gray light of
the morning, an even stripe of fresh snow stretches along the upper side of
each black pipe [...] Today someone wrote "Otto" with his finger on the strip
of virgin snow, and I thought how beautifully that name, with its two soft o's
flanking the pair of gentle consonants suited the silent layer of snow upon
that pipe with its two orifices and its tacit tunnel [@nabokov_guide_1976, 27;
@johnson_guide_1979, 354].

This tightly wound vignette takes the formalist programmatic concern with
"laying bare the device" to its logical conclusion. The pipes can be read as a
metaphor for a literary device. Usually found beneath the street, they now sit
idle and visible above the surface. Yet even when exposed, the device fails to
captivate for long. Disused, it once again passes out of sight, covered in
snow. Concerned with surfaces, the narrator "probes the glaze" of the street
and finds a palindrome written in snow. The inscription "OTTO" not only
resembles the pipes visually, but is in itself a surface-revealing inscription
that makes the pipes visible again. Although the metaphoric pipe does not
reach beyond the page, the mimetic surface inscription draws attention to the
word's visual shape and acoustics. It invites readers to perform the symmetry
of its assonance and consonance as they pronounce the word. The round vowels
and the interrupting obstruents of "OTTO" contort the body in accordance with
the sound image: reverse mimesis, the body as sound pipe. The moment of
corporeal reenactment transcends the representational and paper-bound confines
of the medium. The performance makes the "making of the literary technique
obvious," obvious. Nabokov exposes the metaphor implicit in the very idea of
"laying bare the device." In this, lies the prevalent characteristic of
Nabokov's mature work, which often seeks to transcend the diegetic, fictional
world through sheer recursion of literary technique, where each successive
turn of abstraction brings the buried symbol closer to the reader.

Despite such emphasis on laying bare the device, formalist poetics (both in
art and in scholarship) fell short of producing an explicit theory of
technique. In this section, I will attempt to reconstruct the notion of
technique through the thought of three major literary theorists of the
interwar period: Viktor Shklovsky, Percy Lubbock, and Mikhail Bakhtin. This
grouping does not amount to a school of thought as such. Rather, the concept
of technique emerges in parallel traditions at a formative time in the history
of the literary technology. Viewed in the context of technological
development, the emergence of technique as a critical category reflects the
broader concerns of the machine age. The very idea of *technology* does not
fully find its place in critical literature until the 1950-1970s, judging by
the rash of titles like like Martin Heidegger's *Die Frage nach der Technik*
(1954), Jacques Ellul's *La technique ou l'enjeu du siècle* (1954),  Lynn
White's *Medieval Technology and Social Change* (1966), and *The Technological
Man* (1969) by Viktor Firkiss, among many similar volumes appearing in the
period. Calling for the institution of a new field, the editors of the 1959
inaugural issue of the journal *Technology and Culture* would write about the
"neglect of study of technology" amidst a body of extant work that has
scarcely amounted to a systematic scholarly discipline [@kranzberg_at_1959].
"*Technology* is a word whose time has come," Langdon Winner would write in
his influential volume on *Autonomous Technology* in 1978
[@winner_autonomous_1978, 4]. Before technology, there was technique.

!["Technology" and "technique," the relative frequency of occurrence in the
Google Books ngram corpus
[@michel_quantitative_2011].](images/technology_chart.png)

Seen in this light, the pre-WWII concern with literary technique anticipates
the post-war turn towards technology as a field of cultural analysis. The
formalist period in literary theory signalled a turn away from history and
philosophy of literature towards the mechanics of literary production. The
technical turn entailed a mechanistic understanding of language and
literature, by which linguistic phenomena was viewed as a system of moving
parts, whose relationship to one another was determined by discoverable laws.
The turn to technique meant also that the mechanisms of meaning production, on
the sides of both authorship and apprehension, were made accessible to a mass
audience. The Russian formalists in particular understood their task as one of
radical democratization of the literary sphere. High literature that was once
the purview of the select few could now belong to the proletariat at large.
This meant that the reading and the writing of literature had to be distilled
into a set of reproducible rules---technique over art---to be learned and
shared widely.

Aside from its political implications, the mechanization of language gains
further significance in its instrumental context. As we shall see in the later
chapters, developments in aesthetic theory I describe here followed a period
of rapid innovation in the technologies of the word. The rise of formalist and
consequently structuralist thought---along with philosophy's linguistic turn
that saw language as a as system of rule-based games---parallel the rise of
rule-based programmable media: punch cards, magnetic drums, ticker tape. That
is not to say that theory and technology stand in a reductive causal
relationship to one another. Rather, they form a feedback loop, in which
instruments, practices, and explanatory models evolve through mutual
reciprocation. My understanding of the literary device in both of its
senses---as technique and device---is therefore motivated by more than mere
linguistic ambiguity contained in the meaning of the word device. Locating the
literary theoretical construct of the device within its technological context
allows us to witness the contemporaneous evolution and the mutual
interdependence between art, engineering, and philosophy. The origins of
computer science and literary formalism can be traced back to a set of shared
theoretical assumptions and technological contingencies coming to fore of
telecommunications at in the first few decades of the twentieth century.

It is at this time that the formalist concept of technique begins to remove
the idea of literary production from its affective, intimate, and
irreproducible contexts. The emphasis on craft over art implies primarily a
change in the artist's relationship to modes of artistic production. Walter
Benjamin had this view in mind when he wrote decades later about the work of
art that can no longer be thought of as a "rigid, isolated object." Rather,
"it must be inserted into the context of living social relations," and
therefore, into the context determined by its relation to literary production
[@benjamin_author_1983, 87]. Authorship, in that sense, identifies a specific
mode of labor. Technique for Benjamin made literary products "accessible" to
materialist analysis [@benjamin_author_1983, 87]. Where the artistic genius is
unique, craft carries with it a model of inheritance. Where genius is born,
technique is shared. Where the artist labors alone, the craftsman learns a
trade in a workshop, as part of a collective.

In a more abstracted sense, we can view the turn to technique as a rejection
of Schopenhauer's aesthetics, which emphasised individual creative genius
reaching "beyond the objects which actually present themselves" towards the
transcendent ideal [@schopenhauer_world_1906, 249 and 217-346]. Formalism
dispels the illusion of creation, orienting the artist towards discovery
through handicraft. In his "Art as Device," Shklovsky writes:

> The work of poetic schools amounts to the aggregation and the discovery of
> new devices/techniques [*priem*] for the arrangement and the processing of
> linguistic material, and, in particular, more so with the rearrangement of
> figure [*obraz*] rather than with its creation" [@shklovksy_poetika_1919,
> 102].

The formalists imagined language to comprise a kind of a natural physics-based
system, which, following Herbert Spencer, tended towards the conservation of
energy [@shklovksy_poetika_1919, 105]. In his influential 1852 essay on the
*The Philosophy of Style*, Spencer wrote about ordinary ways of speaking where
"words are not pronounced fully," and where "the mind barely perceives the
initial sounds of each word" [@spencer_philosophy_1892]. The ideal writer
therefore strove to minimize the reader's mental exertion, following what he
called the economy of composition: to say as much as possible, in the most
direct and simple way. Poetry for Spencer was exemplary in this regard, able
to adopt those habituated "symbols of thought" and "those methods of using
them" that have proven themselves to be most effective through continuous use
[@spencer_philosophy_1892].

Shklovsky agreed with Spencer on the dynamics of everyday language, but not of
poetry. The poet "arranges and processes" habituated material with the view of
"resurrecting" the force of the word lost to everyday habituation
[@shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914]. Estrangement, or the de-programming of
received trope, therefore constituted for Shklovsky the primary technique of
aesthetic discourse. Poetic estrangement counterbalances the work of prosaic
habituation, by which short-hand replaces complex things and ideas. Thus, were
everyday language follows the laws of conservation of energy, poetic language
expands energy to make language difficult again [*zatrudnenie*] and to prolong
attention [*vospriiatie*]. If language is a labor-saving device, poetry is
labor-intensive. Any innovation in the linguistic sphere is by these means
bound to follow the cycle of habituation and renewal, according to the
formalists. With time, a literary device capable of arresting attention itself
becomes normalized and in need of rejuvenation. Consequently, the evolution of
aesthetic periods follows a course of arbitrary differentiation, in what Jean
Moréas (a symbolist poet and art critic important for the history of
formalism) called a "cyclical evolution" [*évolution cyclique*], by which the
dominant device in one period, becomes a cliché in the next. Art depletes
itself, "from copy to copy, from imitation to imitation." What seems fresh
today "dries up and shrivels," and what seemed new and spontaneous becomes a
hackneyed commonplace [@moreas_symbolisme_1886]. Technique in that sense was
seen by the formalists as a type of information processing at the
meta-linguistic, social level. The mechanics of "arrangement and the
rearrangement of figure" continually produce new meaning within habituated
contexts, the engine of literary development.

In the 1920s, reflecting critically on Shklovsky's "materialist aesthetics"
Mikhail Bakhtin would write that the formal model of aesthetic genre formation
was capable only of establishing a "chronological table of variance in the
evolution of technical devices, because "in isolation technique cannot have a
history" [@bakhtin_k_2003, 270-1]. Bakhtin was less materially-inclined than
the formalists, careful not to reduce technique to questions of "material
arrangement" alone. He wrote, "I am quite ready to join in the sentiment that
'in art technique is everything,' provided we understand that the aesthetic
object cannot exist independent of the artistic work." For Bakhtin, the work
existed neither in the mind nor in the arrangement of matter alone
[@bakhtin_k_2003, 308-10]. In other words, he argued that any immanent volume
of text, an edition of Shakespeare's *Hamlet* for example, could not exhaust
the possibility of *Hamlet* as a transcendent work of art. Neither could it be
reduced to a pure idea, because any notion of *Hamlet* as an idea must rest on
firm material foundations---the textual witness---be it an original folio or a
critical edition. Similarly, the notion of technique for Bakhtin could not be
reduced to the mere manipulation of physical form, independent of the
aesthetic idea-object. "In art, technique is not mechanistic," he wrote
concluding to write that "technique animates and motivates the aesthetic
object at every point" [@bakhtin_k_2003, 310].

Within the indeterminacy of art as object and idea, Bakhtin approximated the
following formula: "the audience is equivalent to the creator, minus
technique." The audience experiences the creative process of the making of the
work of art, though without an understanding of the craft involved.
Alternatively, the author "equals the audience plus technique"
[@bakhtin_k_2003, 373-4]. For Bakhtin, technique served as the "method of
processing content through material" [@bakhtin_k_2003, 249]. Again we return
to the notion of technique as a mode of labor or a procedure, which transforms
raw material into a work of art, no long an object limited by its physical
dimensions. The goal of poetics---the study of that transformation---for
Bakhtin was therefore the understanding of the "technical apparatus of
aesthetic creation," a movement, in other words, between the work of art as a
thing and the object of art as an idea [@bakhtin_k_2003, 275].

Even as formal analysis skirted the idea of a materialist poetics---Bakhtin
calls it "primitive" and "reductive" for this inclination---the formalists
stopped short of including the physical properties of inscription into
literary analysis. The "matter" of materialist poetics was nevertheless
limited to the rather abstract notion of language, which still seems to me to
exist independently of its physical manifestation. With this in mind, it is
interesting to consider Nabokov's recursive meta-poetics as a logical apogee
of the formalist program. Nabokov's pipes and surface inscriptions protrude
through the diegetic limits of the fictional world. The nesting doll structure
of literary instrumentation ends at the book. Nabokov's prose reveals the page
to be the outer-most literary device containing all other literary devices.
Recall, for example the conclusion of his 1936 *Invitation of Beheading*,
which ends in the imagined dissolution of the diegetic, fictional world and a
glimpse of the material reality "on the other side" of the page:

> Everything was falling. A spinning wind was picking up and whirling: dust,
> rags, chips of painted wood, bits of gilded plaster, pasteboard bricks,
> posters; an arid gloom fleeted; and amidst the dust, and the falling things,
> and the flapping scenery, Cincinnatus made his way in that direction where,
> to judge by the voices, stood beings akin to him [@nabokov_invitation_1959,
176].

Modernist literary technique of the sort gestures towards the object,
arresting the illusion of mimesis and revealing the artifice of the literary
device. Yet, even for the formalists, technique remained an intra-textual
procedure. The material affordances of the literary object were not seen as
participating in the dynamics of meaning making. The book itself receded from
view.

Echoing his Soviet colleagues in his influential *The Craft of Fiction*, the
English critic Percy Lubbock, himself a formalist of sorts, would write:

> To grasp the shadowy and fantasmal form of the book, to hold it fast, to
> turn it over and to survey it at leisure---that is the effort of a critic of
> books, and it is perpetually defeated [...] Nothing, no power, will keep the
> book steady and motionless before us so that we may have time to examine its
> shape and design [@lubbock_craft_1921, 1].

Note the use of the object-oriented vocabulary in the above passage in a way
that does note quite refer to objects. When Lubbock uses words like "form,"
"book," "shape," and "design" or when he refers to "grasping," "holding," and
"keeping the book motionless," he refers to these concepts metaphorically as
in holding, grasping, and keeping the thing before the mind's eye. The book
continually escapes the reader's mental not physical grasp. Nor do his books,
forms, shapes, and designs refer to the outward, material aspects of the
literary artifact. These are again mental constructions, not physical. Our
unfamiliarity with what Lubbock calls the novel's "technical aspects" thereby
hampers our ability to understand how it comes present itself to the mind in
its entirety [@lubbock_craft_1921, 272]. We grasp other more plastic art forms
like sculpture or painting whole and at once. They exist at a time and place
limited to their physical dimensions. Narratives unfold in time, by contrast.
To perceive a book [read, a "novel"] critically, we must abstract from the
physical object and extend it past immediate perception. Meaning making of
this sort involves also reading past the linguistic minutiae to construct a
synthetic literary whole. Lubbock writes that the "real heart and substance of
the book [...] stands out more clearly for the obscurity into which the less
essential parts of it subside" [@lubbock_craft_1921, 4]. To read in this mode
is precisely to deny the book its materiality. When reading for pleasure, lay
readers lose themselves in the in the elements of narrative immediately
available for observation. To read the novel for pleasure for Lubbock is to
"forget, if we can, that the book is an object of art [@lubbock_craft_1921,
6]. By object of art he means the transcendent idea of the novel as opposed to
the immanent object itself. To "objectify the elements" of the novel that
"strike us more keenly," as Lubbock phrases it, therefore means for him quite
the opposite of what is usually meant by objectification. The critic engages
the completed *idea* of the novel, accessible to the mind only after the
reading is finished. Lubbock writes: "Far from losing ourselves in the world
of the novel, we must hold it away from us, see it all in detachment, and use
the whole of it to make the image we seek, the book itself"
[@lubbock_craft_1921, 6].

Critical reading in this sense entails an account of the transformation, from
things to ideas: from words and sentences to stories, novels, and verse.
Echoing Boris Eichenbaum in "How *The Overcoat* is Made", Lubbock evokes the
reader's attention to the technology or craft of such literary construction.
He promises to view a "handful of familiar novels [...] with some
particularity," but without judgement or critique. "How they are made is the
only question I ask," he writes [@shklovksy_poetika_1919; @lubbock_craft_1921,
12 & 28; @eichenbaum_how_1995]. Since "the author of the book was a craftsman"
it is therefore the critic's role to "overtake him at his work and see how the
book was made" [@lubbock_craft_1921, 274]. Lubbock's usage of an
object-oriented vocabulary---"parts," "forms," "shapes," "proportions," and
"designs"---nevertheless refer to ideational, mental constructs, just as it
was for Shklovsky and Eichenbaum. "The book vanishes as we lay our hands on
it," Lubbock writes [@lubbock_craft_1921, 273]. Critics must chose to see
either the trees or the forest. While the totality of the work comes into
view, the technical details of craft---and the book itself---disappear.
Viewed up close, the technical particulates also obscure sight of the work as
a whole. *The Craft of Fiction* ends on an ambivalent note, stopping short of
recovering the book as an object. "If only there was one single tangible and
measurable fact about the book," Lubbock wrote. If only it could be "weighed
like a statue" or "measured like a picture, it would be a support in the world
of shadows [@lubbock_craft_1921, 273-4].

### 2.2 Thought Experiment I

These broad strokes towards the intellectual history of the literary device
bring us to literary devices as they exist today, precisely within the
confusion between symbol and thing. At this point, it becomes productive to
examine the history of modern computing not within its usual lineage of
calculating machinery, but in relation to the broader history of materialist
poetics. I would like the reader to view the following sections in the context
of the previous one on literary theory, even in the absence of direct evidence
for an explicit intellectual connection.[^ln2-moaran] My goal is not to prove
that such a connection exists, but rather to irreparably entangle the two
genealogies while highlighting a shared set of ideas, assumptions, and
concerns. The modern computer---and by extension the electronic book---harkens
back to a cluster of related thought experiments prevalent in the philosophy
of Ludwig Wittgenstein and subsequently to the ideas of Alan Turing, his
long-time student and colleague. The story of Turing machines has been told
before in many guises, but never with an eye towards literary machines that
nevertheless occupy a central place in the early development of modern
computing.

[^ln2-moaran]: There is evidence that Ludwig Wittgenstein, the subject of this
section, read Russian and that he visited the Soviet Union in the 1930s. Both
he and Shklovsky fought in Galicia at the Eastern Front although there is no
evidence that the two men met nor knew of one another's work. See
@moran_wittgenstein_1972.

To confront the computer as a literary device, one must first understand its
peculiar relationship to universal Turing machines. I would like to take some
time now to draw two further as yet unexplored historical lineages that lead
to Turing's seminal essay on computable numbers: the first intellectual,
stemming back to his tutelage under Ludwig Wittgenstein, and the second
material, highlighting the physical similarities between Turing's design and a
number of concomitant developments in printing and communication. To read
Turing and Wittgenstein together is to recover a legacy of humanities
computing that often gets overlooked in the history of computer science and
software engineering. The literary perspective is important because it allows
us to see the computer in a new light: more than a byproduct of
quantification, a metaphor machine. Turing machines should hold interest for
literary scholars because they embody a minimally viable model for generalized
symbolic manipulation: reading and writing. Turing's thought experiments were
meant to solve a mathematical problem, but their history lies also in the
fields of philology and hermeneutics: the study of textual meaning-making and
interpretation.

In his seminal 1936 paper on computable numbers, Alan Turing, then a student
at King's College, proposed a peculiar thought experiment to appear on the
pages of mathematical journal. The experiment addressed a problem in the field
of elementary number theory [^ln1-anticipate]. His solution involved more than
a formula. Instead, he imagined a machine that would in some real sense take
place of the calculation. Ultimately, Turing described a device that was meant
to *embody* the symbol: it transformed external abstractions into physical
states, internal to the device. In doing so, this imagined machine was
designed to breach the boundary between idea and matter. It was exactly an
instrument for transforming ideas into shapes: the very process at the heart
of materialist poetics discussed in the previous section. In this sense,
Turing's hypothetical machine represents the conclusion of a long-standing
thought experiment concerning the nature of human understanding and a
beginning of a new, machine-assisted, philological practice.

The question of "automated" philology echoes through the canon of Western
philosophical tradition. What does it mean to read and to understand
something? Is it enough to repeat the words of another, as for example
Phaedrus does in response to Socrates? Could a student be said to possess
reason if he was merely parroting thoughts and not really thinking on his own?
Would we say the same thing of an animal or a machine? The question as posed
also by Descartes who wrote that it would not be sufficient for the "reasoned
soul" to be "lodged in the human body like a pilot of a ship, except perhaps
to move its members," but that intelligence must be "more closely joined and
united with the body to produce true feelings and appetites"
[@descartes_discourse_1996]? Recall also the experiments with combinatorial
poetics of the 17th century German Jesuit scholar Athanasius Kircher, the
inventor of *Arca Musurgicae*, a music composition device, by which a composer
not versed in music would combine predetermined musical phrases written on
wooden planks to compose a score.

![Kircher's *Arca Musurgicae*, the musical composition box, 1650
[@kircher_musurgia_1999, 184].](images/music-box.jpg)

In correspondence with Kircher, the German Baroque poet Quirinus Kuhlman
argued that using such an instrument to compose music or poetry would amount
to "*sed versûs, non poëma* [mere versification, not poetry]." Would we call a
naive child using such a contraption a composer or a poet, he asked? And
answered:

> Sed lusus est ingeniosus, Ingeniose Kirchere, non methodus, prima fronte
> aliquid promittens, in recessu nihil solvens. Sine cista enim puer nihil
> potest respondere, & in cista nihil praeter verba intelligit; tot profert,
> quot audit, sine intellectu...

> But [the poetry box] is just an ingenious game, ingenious Kircher, not a
> method, promising something on the surface, but solving nothing deep down.
> For without the box the boy can answer nothing, and with the box he
> understands nothing but words. He produces whatever he hears, without
> understanding, like a parrot [@gillespie_primal_1978, 32].

Without the box the child cannot create. Like the parrot of Descartes it
mimics creation on the surface. Nothing in the mind of an automaton
corresponds to the outward appearance of thought. The child composes poetry
without thinking---that is without the appropriate deep structure that should
accompany proper poiesis.

The philosopher John Searle would later pose a similar question in his famous
Chinese Room thought experiment [@searle_minds_1980]. Can a contraption be
said to "speak" a language if inside it contains only a dictionary for looking
up the correct answers to any given query? A man inside the room sorts the
answers blindly. He does not understand the language, yet the contraption
appears to respond properly. Is it enough to appear to understand, in other
words, or should we say that understanding must involve some other appropriate
mechanism, turned inward? Searle argued that his room, a kind of a robot for
automated responses in a foreign language, could not be properly said to speak
a language in the way a fluent speaker can. For Searle and other so-called
"internalists," the external signs of whatever is meant by "speaking" and
"understanding" must correspond to some appropriate internal mental states
[@searle_minds_1980]. Plato, Descartes, Kuhlman, and Searle all pose a version
of the same thought experiment, which aims to draw a line between the surface
appearance of knowledge and an idea of deep, structural understanding opposed
to mere functionalism. Reading should, these thinkers intuit, leave something
behind. A text must be somehow "joined and united" with the body, to
paraphrase Descartes. For understanding to happen words must continue to
produce meaning independent of the original inscription. Internalists like
Searle hold that the inscription and the mental state must achieve a measure
of accordance.

Recall the famous *pharmakon* passage from Plato's *Phaedrus*, which explores
the relationship between writing and mental impression. At the conclusion of
the dialog, King Thamus objects to the technology [*ta tekhnēs*] of the
written word, as he believes it will foster forgetfulness in the people who
use it.  Plato writes: "Their faith in extrinsic writing [*graphō exōthen*],
by means of foreign impressions [*allotrion tupōn*] will diminish their
intrinsic [*endothen autous*] capacity to remember"
[@plato_plato:_1999].[^ln1-platotr] Plato thus contrasts the exterior figure
of the inscription [*graphō exōthen*] with the intrinsic [*endothen*] human
capacity to remember. The Greek *tupōn*, related to the English "type,"
literally means an impression. And in this case it is "foreign" or "othered"
[*allotrion*]. It comes from without. Like Moreno after him, Thamus finds
thought externalized through typography problematic. True memory and thought
for them both must come from within: it must be autopoietic and not
allopoietic activity. For this reason, Socrates asks the young man to stop
reciting the speech by heart in the beginning of the dialog. He wants Phaedrus
to think for himself and not to merely regurgitate the thought of
another---not be a parrot or an automaton, in other words. To truly understand
something and to make a show of their comprehension, readers must do more than
read: they must internalize. Much can go wrong in that process, but we expect
for reading to ultimately leave an appropriate impression [*tupōn*] on the
reader's mind. For understanding to take place, writing must produce "true"
feelings and appetites, in the words of Descartes. But what is true,
appropriate, or proper?  What does it mean to properly internalize or ingest
an inscription?---that is the profound mystery always present even in the most
mundane acts of reading and writing.

Turing's machine must be understood first in the general context of this
broader tradition and second as a specific response to a series of thought
experiments proposed by Ludwig Wittgenstein in the 1930s at King's College,
Cambridge where Turing attended as a student and later as an
instructor.[^ln1-timeline] Wittgenstein broached the problem of reading
machines and comprehension initially in his *Blue and Brown Books* along with
*Philosophical Grammar* (all compiled in the early 1930s), then in his
lectures and remarks on the foundations of psychology and mathematics from the
late 1930s, and finally in *Philosophical Investigations*, written between
1945 and 1949.

The earliest of these documents, *The Blue Book*, begins with a question of
interpretation. "What is a meaning of a word?" Wittgenstein asks. And from the
start, he cautions his students against choosing the easy answer, which holds
that meaning resides in the head. Wittgenstein writes:

> It is misleading then to talk of thinking as of a "mental activity". We may
> say that thinking is essentially the activity of operating with signs. This
> activity is performed by the hand, when we think by writing; by the mouth
> and larynx, when we think by speaking; and if we think by imaging signs or
> pictures, I can give you no agent that thinks. If then you say that in such
> cases the mind thinks, I would only draw your attention to the fact that you
> are using metaphor, that here the mind is the agent in a different sense
> from that in which the hand can be said to be the agent in writing
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 6-7].

Wittgenstein explains that when we see a sentence on paper, the external
manifestation of a thought, we assume that some analogous structure exists
somewhere in the mind. Perhaps, Wittgenstein speculates, we could even observe
the brain directly, in the process of writing, to check if mental states
correspond in some way to the inscription. Both phenomena, brain- and paper-
bound, could properly be called the expression of thought. Yet neither make
sense in isolation. Rather, we are witnessing the workings of a metaphor: a
transference of properties between two distinct locations, one in the head and
one on paper. Neither physical nor mental descriptions of these processes
alone are sufficient to locate cognition. The subject escapes depending on our
point of view. When the hand writes, it is the brain that thinks. But when the
hand thinks, it is the brain that writes. One must understand both sides of
the equation. Meaning in that sense lies in the transition from the hand to
the head and from mind to paper: "Where does thinking take place?" he asks. It
takes place "on paper, in our head, in the mind." But, "none of these
statements of locality gives *the* locality of thinking"
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 16].

"Can a machine think?" Wittgenstein asks later on in the first notebook
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 16]. The problem, as he explains, is not one of
finding a machine that can do the job---of manipulating signs, for example.
It lies in the ability of a machine to enact both sides of the metaphoric
equation. "Doing the job," the manipulation of external signs, must correspond
to something else. Severed from some other analogical structure, the "blind"
manipulation of signs is a meaningless activity. Meaning, Wittgenstein seems
to suggest, resides simply in this analogy between something (symbol) and
something else (sate of a mechanism). The question then can be better
rephrased as "can a machine have private mental states?" Can it feel pain in
the sense of pain being a state of internal affairs not accessible to others
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 16, 46-9]? If we believe machines to be capable of
holding internal, private states we can begin imagining machine understanding
or machine intelligence, by which a spoken word or a letter could find the
appropriate inward representation for the machine. We return to the
correspondence between internal and external state of affairs, although how
such a correspondence would be achieved Wittgenstein does not yet specify.

Wittgenstein extends his thought experiments about thinking machines in his
*Brown Notebook.* Let us study what is meant by "reading," he suggests early
on. By reading, he means the activity of "translating script into sounds," "of
writing according to dictation," or "of copying in writing a page of print"
[@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 119]. Reading once again is "mechanical" reading,
without a sense of "understanding" or interpretation. What happens when a
child reads a newspaper, for example?, Wittgenstein asks echoing Kuhlman and
Descartes. The child's eyes "glide along the printed words, he pronounces them
aloud or to himself, but other words he pronounces after having seen their
first few letters only, other again he reads out letter by letter." The child
acts as a "reading machine" when he pays no attention to what he reads, even
when he speaks the words out loud. He reads "faultlessly like a reliable
machine," Wittgenstein repeats emphasising the mechanical property of
colloquially "mechanic" reading. Another hypothetical child merely pretends to
read. She guesses at the words, and on occasion repeats things "by heart",
without actually seeing them on the page [@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 121-22].
Would any of these scenarios rise to our understanding of what reading should
entail?

Wittgenstein continues to complicate such edge cases, challenging his
audience's intuitions of what it means to read and to understand. He gives
also the example of a hallucinating patient, who "reads" what to us looks like
gibberish, and the case of man who fakes reading Cyrillic by memorizing the
lines phonetically. He talks of machines too, which produce random sounds that
occasionally, by accident, correspond to some existing texts. In each case, we
envision two mechanisms, Wittgenstein writes, one visible and external and one
hidden and internal. To read, the reader must do more than go through the
motions of reading. Outward signs of reading are insufficient to indicate
reading and comprehension. The physical motions---of gliding one's eyes across
the page and saying the words out loud---must connect in some way with
appropriate internal, mental representations.

We are tempted then to privilege the inward-facing signs of comprehension as
the "real criterion for a person's reading or not reading." However, no such
internal mechanisms can be known to us or communicated to others properly,
Wittgenstein writes [@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 120]. We can only intuit the
reader's private experience of reading, or whether such reading attains the
desired correspondence between outward sign and inward state. Absent
first-hand access to private mental states of another, a reading pupil must
convince his teacher that the scanned sign had the intended effect through
language. This requires even more words in a sort of an interrupted
hermeneutic circuit, the two sides of which do not quite connect to complete
the communication feedback loop. To convince Socrates that he did more than
memorize the words, Phaedrus must use more words, which are similarly
unconvincing. What if those are memorized as well? What can be done to
convince others that we have understood a text properly? Wittgenstein finally
describes the mechanisms of reading as an "indirect way of transmitting a
feeling." "Something that we can never know happens at the other end" of the
communication act [@wittgenstein_blue_1965, 185]. Communication, as we would
say today, is always mediated. In conclusion of the notebooks, Wittgenstein
imagines the possibility of unmediated, "direct" modes communication, capable
of transmitting feelings from one person to another. Barring that possibility,
we are ultimately limited by private sensations of knowledge. Any sense of
affirmation comes through further expression entailing further uncertainty.

Thought experiments in *The Blue and Brown Notebooks* do not amount to a
cohesive model of language, communication, or the mind. They do however
contain the seeds of the reading and writing machines later imagined by Alan
Turing at the formative sources of modern computing. Wittgenstein's
experimental thought machines prefigure the conversation on machine
intelligence. Wittgenstein conjures his fantastical broken mechanisms to test
the limits of our intuitions about reading, writing, and comprehension.

*Philosophical Grammar,* written around the same time as the *Blue and Brown
Notebooks*, gives us another glimpse into the pre-history of the literary
device. It begins again with a problem of "understanding" and "not
understanding." "To understand language," Wittgenstein writes, means "to take
in symbolism as a whole" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 5]. From the very
first passages, Wittgenstein envisions "understanding" as a type of
trans-mediation. In comparing the understanding of language propositions to
music, he writes: "for explanation I can only translate the musical picture
into a picture in another medium and let one picture throw light on the other"
[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 5 & 41]. And elsewhere: "How curious: we
should like to explain the understanding of a gesture as a *translation* into
words, and the understanding of words as a translation into gestures [emphasis
mine]" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 42]. In conclusion, he again
describes what we mean by "understanding" as a "process of translation from
one symbolism into another; tracing a picture, copying something, or
translating into another mode of representation"
[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 45]. To understand something said is thus
akin to modeling it in clay or by drawing, he writes. Whatever is meant by
"understanding" comes through the comparative transference between media.

In light of our earlier discussion about metaphoric transference,
Wittgenstein's hermeneutics can be viewed as a type of metaphor making across
media, translation, or trans-mediation. It is insufficient to merely
paraphrase something: to show understanding one must "draw a picture" or
"model" in a way that reveals correspondence of equivalent structures.
Language cannot be explained in language, for example. One trades symbolisms
in a sense, creating a model that explains one representational system in
terms of another. This process is not exact. For example, how would one check
whether a "clay model" corresponds to a "language model" of something? In
thinking of the various ways in which the process of translation breaks,
Wittgenstein continually returns to the pianola, a type of a player piano.
The mechanism of the player piano defines the relationship between music score
sheet and the keyboard in a rigid way. Perforated sheet music passes through
the machine, activating a set of corresponding pins. When functioning
properly, the pins have no other option but to respond appropriately. The
symbolism of music notation and the symbolism of the mechanism stand in accord
to one another. The rigidity of the connection assures correspondence. The
machine enacts an exacting translation from one medium to another. We are
guaranteed correspondence between the two through mechanical means as the
actuating mechanism of the player piano fits into the groves of the piano
roll.

![Electrically-operated musical instrument by Clyde Coleman of Chicago, Il.
1914, US1107495A. Wittgenstein returns to the image of pianola throughout his
writings.](images/pianola.png)

This sort of a rigid correspondence brings us closer to a solution to the
"proper interpretation" problem. But, like the other, less exacting,
mechanisms of comprehension, the pianola can break too. In the early passages
of *Philosophical Grammar*, Wittgenstein explains: "Aren't our sentences parts
of a mechanism? As in a pianola? But suppose it is in bad condition? So it is
not the effect but the purpose of the signs (the holes in the pianola roll).
Their purpose *within* the mechanism" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 10].
Wittgenstein elaborates a few pages later:

> The sentences that we utter have a particular purpose, they are to produce
> certain effects. They are parts of a mechanism, perhaps a psychological
> mechanism, and the words of the sentences are also parts of the mechanism
> (levers, cogwheels, and so on). The example that seems to illustrate what
> we're thinking of here is an automatic music player, a pianola. It contains
> a roll, rollers, etc., on which the piece of music is written is some kind
> of notation (the position of holes, pegs, and so on). It's as if the written
> sign gave orders which are carried out by keys and hammers
> [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 69].

As was the case with reading automata in *The Blue and Brown Notebooks*,
Wittgenstein again substitutes a physical mechanism for the process of
symbolic interpretation. In this view, words and music notation alike contain
"a purpose" to elicit some "effects" in the interpretive mechanism. As before,
we cannot always expect the mechanism of interpretation to function properly,
nor do we have a reliable way to check its operation. "Suppose the pianola is
in bad condition," Wittgenstein repeats. The signs on the roll could produce
"hisses and bangs" instead of music, for example. One could object that notes
are always "meant" to play on a mechanism in perfect working order. But to
explain what is meant, we would need to draw yet another diagram or build
another machine. Wittgenstein explain through another analogy. The "sense" of
an "order"---the programming instructions of the piano roll---lies in its
"effect on an obedient man" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 60-70]. The
pianola exemplifies a class of controlling mechanisms. In good working
condition it is ultimately obedient to the instructions printed on a piano
roll.

When drawing the analogy between mental and mechanical processes, Wittgenstein
explicitly rejects the model of language as a "psychophysical" mechanism.
Rather, as the title of the work suggests, Wittgenstein is in search for the
"grammar" governing the engagement: between speakers and listeners, readers
and writers, player pianos and musical scores. By the end of the work, grammar
emerges as a set of "conventions." Wittgenstein complicates the mechanism by
inserting an extra layer of "rules" that mediate between symbol and machine or
mental state. A convention could be agreed upon and transcribed in a chart,
for example. And it is possible that "there is a part of the mechanism which
resembles the chart, and is inserted between the language-part of the
mechanism and the rest of it," he writes [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974,
190]. Again we imagine a set of instructions that could enforce strict
compliance between the musical score and the actuating parts of the piano
mechanism.

A programmer would say that Wittgenstein's "set of instructions that ensure
correspondence" resemble modern programming language interpreters and
assemblers, exactly the parts of the machine that connect codified
instructions to their execution [@mccarthy_lisp_1962; @bashkow_system_1967].
The interpreter "defines the semantics of a programming language" where the
assembler "accepts a set of a set of symbolically-coded instructions" and
"translates them into machine language" [@elbourn_evolution_1962, 1060;
@neuhold_formal_1971, 95].[^ln2-compile] Wittgenstein imagines something like
a programming language along with an interpreter and a compiler when he
writes, "imagine a language consisting of commands." It is to direct a human
"forwards," "back," "right," and "left," "quickly" and "slowly"
[@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 197] Add to it a grammar, a table of
correspondences, which explains the meaning of the signs. The grammar "means"
in the sense of specifying the rules by which meaning succeeds or fails,
Wittgenstein explains. In this way, we can move away from speaking of
"intended effects" or "proper obedience," and rather concentrate on this
interpretive, translative layer, which describes the very rules of engagement.

[^ln2-compile]: I am forgoing the distinction between interpreters and
compilers for simplicity's sake.

### 2.3 Thought Experiment II

Turing met Wittgenstein at King's College sometime in the 1930s. Although
there are no records of them meeting explicitly until Turing's attendance of
Wittgenstein's lectures on the foundation of mathematics in 1939 , both men's
work exhibits sustained attention to computing machines narrowly and to the
mechanical manipulation of symbols more generally
[@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 7]. From the notes on Wittgenstein's
lectures complied and published by Cora Diamond, it is clear that Turing was a
vociferous presence in the class. His name is mentioned eighty-six times in
the text, more than any other student by a wide margin.[^ln1-margin] At some
point of the course Wittgenstein concludes his lecture in saying:
"Unfortunately, Turing will be away from the next lecture, and therefore that
lecture will have to be somewhat parenthetical. For it is not good my getting
the rest to agree to something that Turing would not agree to"
[@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 67-68].

Like he did with the notebooks beforehand, Wittgenstein structured his
lectures around the problem of symbolic interpretation. "I am going to talk
about the interrelation of mathematical symbols," Wittgenstein begins. We
imagine that logical laws represent some sort of "fixed" mechanisms "behind"
the symbols used to express them. "I am speaking against the idea of logical
machinery," Wittgenstein says in lecture XX. "The idea of logical machinery
would suppose that there was something behind our symbols"
[@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 194]. We imagine logic to be a sort of a
"rigid mechanism" that can only turn this way or the other. "Any rule can be
imagined to be a description of a mechanism---even the rule which says a pawn
must not be moved in a certain way," Wittgenstein writes
[@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 282]. The parts of the mechanism
subsequently exist in a causal relationship to one another. Pushing this or
that lever will *always* result in such and such movement, because of the way
the mechanical parts are connected. We say that the mechanism is rigid or the
law is inexorable, when the results of an action are absolutely fixed.
Wittgenstein calls such a relationships "super-hardness." Where a judge can be
lenient, he explains, the law is compulsory. What we would now call "an
algorithm" compels predictable execution.

We are tempted, as before, to privilege the inner workings of the symbolic
mechanism, also at the core of meaning making in mathematics. "If I show you
the mechanism behind the [watch] dial, you will be able to predict the
movement of the hour hand for any given movement of the minute hand,"
Wittgenstein writes. But once again, how do we know if the mechanism is
functioning properly? For example, I may drop the clock, Wittgenstein
explains, "so that the machinery is broken, or a lighting may strike it
[@wittgenstein_wittgensteins_1976, 195]. The check the mechanism for damage we
need "a picture," a diagram, or some sort of schematics that describe what the
properly functional mechanism looks like. The mechanism is in fact itself a
type of a symbol for the perfected behavior of the sort that we expect. We can
compare the broken clock with a clock that works, for example. Where we tried
to find the mechanism behind the symbol, we find also the symbol behind the
mechanism. But also we again struggle to complete the circuit of
interpretation between intent and effect, which never quite manage to explain
and to verify each other. How do we know that our "gold standard" working
clock is itself functioning properly? We are faced with a series of receding
analogies.

In his lectures on mathematics, Wittgenstein never finds a way out of this
conundrum. The foundations of mathematics rely on some such mutually dependent
relationship between the physical and the symbolic worlds. Whether it is in
math or in ordinary language, some magic happens at the coupling of matter and
sign. The precise point of contact concerns Wittgenstein in all fields of
human activity, from literature to psychology and mathematics. In all of these
fields, Wittgenstein finds an implicit analogy between "symbol" and
"mechanism." A type of metaphor, the analogy itself is atomic. It cannot be
split further into something like sign and referent, or signifier and
signified. Considered apart, the two parts of the metaphor are strictly
meaningless. In his lectures on aesthetics, Wittgenstein describes such a
semiotic relationship as the "concomitance between mechanism and its trace"
[@wittgenstein_lectures_1966, 16]. In giving an account of one's aesthetic
judgment, the best we can do is to "trace a mechanism," Wittgenstein writes
[@wittgenstein_lectures_1966, 13].

It would be a mistake however to reduce Wittgenstein's semiotics simply to the
mechanical theory of language or the mind. Rather, in presenting his students
and readers with a number of hypothetical machines, Wittgenstein attempts to
discover the "rule book" of what he later calls a language game---or at lest
to suggest that such a rulebook might exist. Much has been written on this
aspect of Wittgenstein's thought and its relation to Bertrand Russel's
symbolic logic and subsequently to Chomsky's development of the "universal
grammar" [ln2-chomchom]. In the context of our conversation, Wittgenstein's
"middle period" is important for its direct influence on Turing's model of
computation.

[ln2-chomchom]: I make this connection with many caveats and with the
acknowledgement of the complexity involved. See for example Ch. 6-8 in
@hacking_why_1975; @waller_chomsky_1977; @green_bertrand_2007, 103-43.

Several prominent characteristics pass from Wittgenstein's reading to Turing's
universal machines. First, the symbolic machine emerges from the metaphor-like
correspondence between internal machine state and external symbolic
representation. Second, Wittgenstein discusses symbolic representation in
terms of its delayed effects, that is, ultimately, a type of a control
mechanism. And finally, Wittgenstein imagines a mediating layer that holds the
rules for translation between state and symbol. All of these features, along
with a collection of hypothetical machines in various states of disrepair,
pass directly from Wittgenstein to Turing.

Turing's machine offers a strikingly minimalist response to the legacy of
automated hermeneutics, which I have began to outline above. His universal
machine subsumes all of Wittgenstein's examples, forming the minimally-viable
blueprint for generalized symbolic manipulation. To function, Turing's machine
needs only the following three components: (a) a storage medium capable of
holding symbolic inscription, (b) a reading and writing mechanism to operate
on the symbols, and (c) a way to transform external symbolic states into
internal states of the mechanism. Given these three characteristics, the
machine becomes a universal mechanism. The universal Turing machine can assume
the function of any other machine, as long as that machine's internal states
are amenable to symbolic representation. Symbolic machine states comprise the
input of the universal machine. In Wittgenstein's terms, Turing imagines a
mechanism able to "trace the mechanism" of all other forms of symbolic
manipulation. In this lies the essence of universal Turing computation.

Let us examine the machine more carefully. Turing begins his paper as we would
expect from Wittgenstein's lineage, with an analogy: "we may compare a man in
the process of computing a real number to a machine that is only capable of a
finite number of conditions" [@turing_computable_1937, 231]. In effect, he
asks his readers to compare computation, a human mental process, to the
mechanical action of a machine. As Charles Petzold explained it in his
book-length annotation on Turing's paper, Turing "makes reference to 'states
of mind' that are analogous to machine states" [@petzold_annotated_2008, 67].
When read in the context of Wittgenstein's thought experiments, it becomes
clear that the analogy itself is a kind of a provocation. Neither
mathematicians nor philosophers of mind agreed then nor do they now on the
extent to which states of mind can be compared to discrete machine states.
Turing provocatively slides into the language of cognition to reinforce the
analogy between mind and mechanism. His machines "think" and his humans
"compute" throughout.

Turing further imagines a machine "supplied with a 'tape' (the analogue of
paper) running through it, and divided into sections (called 'squares') each
capable of bearing a 'symbol'" [@turing_computable_1937, 231]. Much like a
movie reel, the tape moves through the mechanism one section at a time. At
each point only one section bearing one symbol can be said to be "in the
machine." "We may call this square the 'scanned square,'" Turing writes and
continues:

> The symbol on the scanned square may be called the "scanned symbol." The
> "scanned symbol" is the only one of which the machine is, so to speak,
> "directly aware" [@turing_computable_1937, 231].

The scanned symbol becomes a part of the machine's internal configuration, or,
to slide into the cognitive vocabulary along with Turing, a part of its
"awareness." In Turing's words, "the machine can effectively remember [!] some
of the symbols which it has 'seen' (scanned) previously"
[@turing_computable_1937, 231]. The machine's "behavior" is therefore
determined by its initial configuration---the arrangement of tape and scanning
apparatus---plus the scanned symbol. The scanned symbol becomes a part of
machine "memory." In contemporary language we would say that the mechanism
translates software into hardware, and the other way around, in a process of
translation already suggested in Wittgenstein thought experiments.

We imagine then a device not unlike a telegraph or a film projector, which
ingests reels of tape. But unlike telegraphs or film projectors, the ingested
symbolic representation becomes, by definition, a part of the machine's
internal state in a way that telegraph tape or film reels do not when it comes
to telegraphs and film projectors. The film reel and the ticker tape pass
through the mechanism without leaving a trace. The tape of the Turing machine
alters the machine's internal configuration in a way that lasts beyond the
tape's discharge from the mechanism. If you recall Wittgenstein's earlier
thought experiments in this vein, he too spoke of humans in the process of
reading or doing mathematics who similarly "ingest" symbols; of the need to
internalize external symbolic states; and of affecting a change in mental
states, on some real and empirically observable neurological level, that
correlate to the symbol. Turing's machine is capable of such ingestion.  It
"thinks," "reads," and "remembers" to the extent of its capability to scan and
internalize symbolic inscription. The Turing machine in effect gives us a
concise and minimally viable definition of "reading" and "becoming aware."
Proper reading for Turing simply involves the appropriate internalization of
the symbol, for both human and machine. His machine did not just scan, it
"read" in the Platonic sense, able to convert ideal forms into their specific
physical instantiations: to trace the mechanism behind the symbol, something
Wittgenstein did not think was possible.

In addition to "reading," Turing's machine also writes. Turing writes that "in
some configurations in which the scanned square is blank (*i.e.* bears no
symbol) the machine writes down a new symbol on the scanned square"
[@turing_computable_1937, 231]. The machine is capable also of erasing and
moving symbols to adjacent squares, one square at a time. Reading, writing,
and symbolic manipulation are all actions at the core of Turing's computation.
More than just reading, Turing's machine reading is capable of altering the
rules of scansion. If we take "reading" to initially entail "moving our eyes
from left to right," for example, we must also imagine machine symbols that
stand for instructions like "now move from right to left." The configuration
state of the machine determines the movement of the "reading" and "writing"
apparatus along the surface of the tape. Unlike an analog watch, to use a
simple example, the mechanism of the Turing machine is not "set in stone." It
is capable of altering its own inner works. In this action, some of the
scanned symbols represent computable numbers, or data as we would say today,
on which computation is performed. Yet other symbols represent machine
instructions, which define the rules of computation. This type of
instructional symbols directs the movement of the reading and writing heads,
which "write," "scan," or "erase" symbols. Today, we would call such
instructions "programs," "applications," or "software." Control codes and
computed data within a Turing machine form a part of the same continuous
stream of information. Computation, in the Turing sense, entails the
transference between symbolic and solid states of being.

Just as the Turing machine is able, in theory, to convert symbolic
representation into internal configuration states, it can conversely enact the
opposite movement, by representing internal configuration states symbolically.
This remarkable property allows for the creation of what Turing calls a class
of *universal* machines, distinct from mere single-purpose computers.
Specific Turing machines can be configured to preform specific actions like
addition or multiplication. But the multiplication machine cannot, for
example, be reconfigured for another purpose, because the physical movement of
its internals is fixed. An electronic scale, for example, is built for one
purpose only. It cannot be used for word processing or for the calculation of
missile trajectories. An adding machine can only add. The universal Turing
machine by contrast has the ability to internalize *other machine
configurations*. Such a machine can, in Turing's words, "compute any
computable sequence" [@turing_computable_1937, 241]. In being able to
internalize physical configuration as symbol, the universal Turing machine
gains the ability to simulate all other special-purpose Turing machines, as
long as these machines are amenable to symbolic representation. For this
reason, Turing computation excludes non symbolic, mechanical action like
hammering nails or harvesting grain. The Turing machine simulates symbolic
manipulations. It is a trace of a trace; a diagram of diagrams.

The transition of symbols into machine states (and the other way around)
defines modern programming. Unlike other, definitive, single-purpose and
limited-state mechanisms (a clock for example), a universal machine contains
the ability to take on differing internal symbolic configurations. It can
imitate a clock, an abacus, a scale, a book. In a later paper that links
computing machinery and intelligence, Turing implied also that his machine
could eventually simulate human thought, because as we saw human thought is in
itself a type of a symbolic manipulation
[@turing_computing_1950].[^ln1-compete]

The universal Turing machine finally encapsulates a model of computation
itself. It is capable of computing anything computable. In substituting the
concept of computability with "effective computability" Turing's paper belongs
to the annals of mathematical theory. But, it continues to elicit conflicting
responses widely because much of it contains also the tantalizing
possibilities that bare on symbolic manipulation generally, including ideas
about human cognition and comprehension. From its opening lines, we are asked
to consider the similarity between humans and machines in the process of
thinking. Turing consistently describes machine states in terms of "states of
mind," "awareness," and "memory." These descriptions hint at the impact of
computation more broadly, beyond mathematical theory. Besides offering a
mathematical proof, the paper embarks on an experimental, ludic even,
enterprise in the spirit of Wittgenstein's playful experimentation, which
often involved altered states of mind, drugs, delirium, madness, and outright
deception.

Reconstructing the influence of Wittgenstein's thought on Turing confirms the
unexpected place of Turing's "On Computability" in the conversation about
language, mental states like pain, reading, and the structure of
comprehension. Seen in the light of Wittgenstein's philosophy, Turing's work
and consequently the early history of computing acquires a broader
significance, beyond the narrow confines of the *Entscheidungsproblem*, the
problem the paper addressed explicitly. In 1936, on the eve of World War II,
Turing imagined more than a formula: it was a thing that could explore the
limits of theory, and a theory that identified a new class of emerging things.
Through Turing's well-documented involvement in Government Code and Cypher
School (GC&CS) at Bletchley Park, actual Turing machines changed the nature of
warfare: used at first to break encrypted military communications and then to
compute missile trajectories. But as I have argued here, Turing machines also
changed humanity's relationship to symbolic thought. They belong to an
intellectual tradition of distinctly humanist thinking about reading, writing,
text, and interpretation.

### 2.4 Device

It is important to remember that in 1936 Turing's machine remained a thought
experiment---not yet an actual device. Literature in computer science tends to
see universal Turing machines as algorithms: virtual and symbolic abstractions
from hardware. Yet it is impossible to entirely disassociate the
implementation from the idea. The Turing machine "abstracts away from the
complexity of real computer architectures," Thomas Haigh recently wrote for
the *Communications of Computing Machinery*. It appeals to the theorist
precisely because it is a theory. Haigh writes that "hardware and software"
are interchangeable to the theorist, but not to the historian"
[@haigh_actually_2014]. In his 1937 review of Turing's "On Computable Numbers"
paper, Alonzo Church, the American mathematician whose work anticipated
Turing's (independently) in several important aspects, would similarly
acknowledge the material foundations of Turing computing. "A human calculator,
provided with pencil and paper and explicit instructions can be regarded as a
kind of a Turing machine," he wrote [@church_computable_1937, 42-3; also cited
in @petzold_annotated_2008, 63]. Disregarding the broader, metaphysical
implications of that statement, note for now the persistence of two essential
implements required for the minimally viable operation of the Church--Turing
human and machine calculators. Pen and paper assert themselves through the
abstraction.[^ln1-abstraction]

To encounter the universal Turing machine underpinning the electronic book *as
a mechanism*, the media and book historian will find that it borrows from a
number of extant designs, which, together and incrementally, give the
universal Turing machine its physical form. Once we have grasped the notion of
the Turing machine as a piece of software, an algorithm, I am compelled to
wonder about its history as a mechanism and ask, what are its technological
antecedents? What would happen if Turing attempted to patent his device, for
example? What previous art and related designs would he have to cite in his
application? In an answer to these question we discover, perhaps
unsurprisingly, that the Turing machine belongs to a long lineage of
controlling devices. This entails also that the book, subsumed by computation,
also embodies a part of the same material history.

Most of the minimal physical requirements to build a universal Turing machine
were within reach in the 1930s, at the time Turing authored his influential
paper. In practice, his proposal would require first, an apparatus capable of
"scanning" and "erasing" a "finite number of symbols." Second, we would need
what Turing calls "one-dimensional paper," divided into discrete squares "like
a child's arithmetic book" [@turing_computable_1937, 249].[^ln1-infinite]
Furthermore, we would need some sort of a mechanism to advance tape through
the machine, or, alternatively, to propel the scanning mechanism along the
length of the tape. Having assembled these elements, our creation would look
roughly like a cross between a telegraph, a film projector, and a
typewriter.[^ln1-davey]

Were we to patent the Turing machine in the United States, at the time of its
invention, the above elements would find prior art in mechanisms such as the
"Numeral adding or subtracting attachment for type-writing machines"
[@daugherty_numeral_1894], "Combined Type-writing and Computing Machine"
[@degener_combined_1911], "Computing Attachment for Typewriters"
[@wright_computing_1914], "Computing Mechanism" [@wright_computing_1915], and
"Combined Type-writing and Adding Machine" [@ellis_combined_1914] among
others. All of these machines contain some combination of a reading and
writing "head," storage tape, and movement mechanism as specified in Turing's
paper. A number of inventions at the end of the nineteenth century pertain
specifically to "circuit-controlling devices controlled by a traveling
perforated strip or tape" [@cuttriss_telegraphy_1893]. Prior to perforated
tape, the transmission of messages by telegraph required the presence of a
skilled operator, able to transcribe messages from text to Morse code, and
into the physical motion of a lever-operated circuit. In the operation of
early telegraphy, the human operator acted as a mute interpreter between text
and telegraph. The transcription of text into signal, and back onto paper,
required the real-time presence of human encoders and decoders.  The
perforated tape decoupled the human from the machine.

In US1187035 (1916) on "Telegraphy", Albert and Ralph Bumstead explain: "the
object of our invention is to provide a system of telegraphy which does not
require skilled operators for the transmission and reception of messages"
[@bumstead_telegraphy_1916]. Instead, the message was transcribed into
perforation via mechanical means and then fed into the mechanism. The tape
mechanics of the typewriter could then be coupled with the electrics of the
telegraph, with perforated tape acting as a mediator between the two "worlds"
of mechanics and electricity. A number of contraptions emerged at the time
with the aim of transfiguring the mechanical action of the typewriter into
perforation, and, consequently, perforation into script, completing the
circuit between automated "encoding" and "decoding." As one machine converted
human input into mechanical states, and into signal, another machine converted
signals into mechanical states and thereon into human-legible messages.

A multitude of inventions capitalized on the control capabilities of removable
storage media by the beginning of the of the twentieth century. These included
machines for tape-controlled telegraphic transmission
[@wheatstone_improvement_1874; @murray_tape-controlled_1905;
@bumstead_telegraphy_1916], tape-controlled printing [@creed_printing_1911],
printing telegraphs [@hallden_printing-telegraph_1929], and remote broadcast
programming devices for radio and television content [@vriendt_program_1934;
@brown_automatic_1936; @brown_selective_1936]. With the invention of punch
cards and perforated tape (also used in textile looms, as early as 1725), a
message meant for another human became also a physical medium---bumps and
holes---used to animate the mechanical movement of the transmission apparatus.

For example, of the 33 asserted claims in the Bumstead brothers' "Telegraphy"
patent, the first 13 relate to the "transmission of intelligence,"

> [...] adapted to initiate a succession of electrical impulses all of which
> have a character representing significance, a receiver adapted to detect
> variations in time intervals elapsing between successive impulses, a
> plurality of interpreting relays selectively actuated by said receiver, and a
> printed mechanism responsive for the combined action
> [@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 12-13].

What begins as a description of a mechanism for information transmittal, ends
with a claim about hermeneutics of control. Starting with clause 14, the
brothers begin to describe "a telegraph system" capable of "transmitting
impulses" at varying time intervals. In the language of the patent, the length
of the time interval "represents significance," involving an automated
receiver responsible for "distributing, interpreting, and recording." The
printing mechanism is further "arranged to print the interpretation of the
signals which is made by the interpreting relays" [@bumstead_telegraphy_1916,
6]. The interpreting relays transform time intervals into a "typographical
form" representing "a letter, a figure, or other characters," "in accordance
with a code" [@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 13]. Initially, the telegraph prints
to "transmit intelligence." But the authors also understand that the varying
time intervals could also signify other information, meant to actuate a
variety of devices. By the middle of the patent, the brothers refer to their
invention in terms of a "controlling medium," capable of operating everything
from typesetting machines to more general "sunflower switches." "Indeed the
detector and the interpreting relay could be made to actuate a set of
sunflower switches for an indicator without including a printer at all," the
authors conclude [@bumstead_telegraphy_1916, 12].

Along with hundreds of similar inventions patented around the turn of the
twentieth century, Bumstead brothers describe a mechanism that could function
as a Turing machine with little modification. The automated telegraph, driven
by ticker tape, and connected to a printer contain all the necessary
requirements set out by Turing: a discrete symbolic language, the removable
storage medium, and a device that can alter its internal states based on the
reading and writing of scanned symbols. They are able "read" and "write" and
otherwise manipulate symbolic representation, they ingest tape, and they
covert symbol into internal structure. By 1905, Donald Murray, the inventor of
the popular Murray telegraph, could write that "if we disregard the small
class of telegrams that merely express emotions, *the essence of telegraphy is
control* [emphasis mine]." He wrote also that "telegraph systems, therefore,
belong not to the class of producing or distributing, but to the class of
controlling mechanisms" [@murray_setting_1905, 556]. For the automated
telegraph, control code and the message are one. The mechanism interprets some
signals as figure and character and other signals as control code affecting
the internal mechanical configuration of the device. The first type of code
holds "significance" for humans, where the second for the mechanism itself. It
is "transmitting intelligence" in a sense of externalizing machine states and
"interpreting" in the sense of mechanical reconfiguration of internal parts.

By 1936, when Turing published his paper on computable numbers, these
inventions did not merely anticipate the modern computer, they were brought to
mass market in the widespread manufacture of computing scales, dial recorders,
electric tabulating machines, and computing typewriters made by companies like
Underwood Computing Machine, Electromatic, and International Business Machines
(IBM). Rather than a single eureka moment, the invention of the computer
should therefore be viewed as a gradual historical process that culminates in
Turing's universal (and minimally viable) specifications. What does the
material history of the computer mean for the history of the book?  In viewing
the book as a kind of a precursor to a generalized machine of symbolic
manipulation we discover that it belongs to a class of controlling devices.

The very nature of Turing machines implies the irreversible admixture of
matter, content, and control structure. When reading a paper and cloth book,
one can definitively isolate a) the physical properties of paper and cloth
from b) the content of the book and from c) the legal and political elements
governing the production of textuality. To wit: tear out the copyright notice
along with the ISBN number, copy the words into a notebook, and recycle the
paper. The literary device, by contrast, ingests both symbolic representation
and control code through the same input stream.  Where images of governance
(like trademark and copyright symbols) *signify*, computed text *embodies*.
Computation enacts control in exactly the sense by which Wittgenstein suggests
the existence of "rules for obedience" between symbol and interpretation.

The limits of physical engineering pull the Turing machine back to the sphere
of the applied.[^ln1-cs] What are we to make of universal Turing machines
implemented in virtual worlds like *Wireworld* (a cellular automaton
simulation), or *Minecraft* (a procedurally generated sand-box
world-exploration game)?

<!--

![Universal Turing machine as an idea. "Nick Gardner's *Wireworld* multiplier,
via a Turing machine."](images/turing-idea.png)

-->

At the very least, we must admit that such simulations do not rest on the
immaterial "turtles all the way down," unless that is, one believes that the
universe itself is a type of Turing computation [@deutsch_quantum_1985;
@lloyd_ultimate_2000; @piccinini_computational_2007]. At some point, the
Turing machine in the virtual world meets the material limits of the physical.
Simulation engines like *Minecraft* and *Wireworld* do in some sense exist in
the abstract, as code or even a set of rules written on paper. But in another
sense, they do not. They come fully into being only when instantiated within
first-order, physical constrains that involve actual circuit boards and relay
switches, or, at the very least, a pen and paper. For this reason, the
performance (in terms of cycles per second, instructions per cycle, or its
capacity to hold a number of instructions) of a Turing machine simulated
within a virtual world like Minecraft cannot logically exceed the performance
of the machine running Minecraft itself. The physical capabilities of the
bottom-most device limit the computational power of all *n+1* order Turing
simulations. The bottom-most turtle may have its head in the clouds, but its
feet rest firmly on the ground.

The exact plane where the symbolic meets the material is difficult to
identify. At some imperceptible point software disappears into hardware. Such
ambiguity between hardware and software leads to some controversy in the
critical literature, as evidenced by Lev Manovich's playful response to
Kittler's "there is no software" argument. If I understand it correctly,
Kittler's short but often cited essay picks up the thread of Kittler's earlier
work to posit what he calls a "postmodern writing scene." "We do not write
anymore," Kittler writes. "Human-made writing passes through microscopically
written inscriptions which, in contrast to all historical writing tools, are
able to read and write by themselves" [@kittler_there_1995]. According to this
schema, Kittler sees the paper-bound design blueprints of the first integrated
microprocessor as the last "real" piece of writing. Everything written after
that point is hardware, because all digital modes of representation, including
text, ultimately rest on hardware architecture. The inability to understand
hardware, in this view, precludes all higher modalities of reading, writing,
or interpretation.

Manovich inverts Kittler's argument into "there is only software," by which he
means that in a pragmatic sense, software determines the properties of any
media object. "What you can do with a particular digital media file can change
dramatically," depending on the software, Manovich writes. When it comes to
digital photographs, to use his example, one application may allow the
photographer to crop the image while another may not [@manovich_there_2011,
151]. From this property-determining aspect of the computational medium (and
in reference to the work of Alan Kay), Manovich derives the concept of
*metamedia*, "a medium that can dynamically simulate the details of any other
medium" [@manovich_there_2011, 105-6]. "Interactive software adds a new set of
operations which can be applied to all media, which we as users experience as
their new 'properties'," he writes. Furthermore, these properties vary
according to the software [@manovich_there_2011, 150-1]. Kittler (who passed
in 2011) could perhaps object to that line of reasoning in maintaining that
chip architecture still determines, as foundation, all higher levels of
textuality "floating" above the silicon bedrock. In other words, everything
Manovich writes is true for all *simulated* media, but not for computation
itself. In opening a series of nested software black boxes, the post-silicon
writer and scholar of software hits the impenetrable casket of chip
architecture. The hardware giving rise to the simulation is not in itself a
simulation. It therefore ultimately determines the "properties" of software,
the metamedium.

Wittgenstein's thought experiments do not let us fall definitively into one
camp or another. The Turing machine remains a machine for translating symbolic
information into physical states. We arrive finally at the sheer alienness of
the book as a piece of telecommunication technology. Writing converts mental
states into arbitrary external representations, inscribed into a medium. Such
inscriptions persist, through time, beyond their biological origin. They are
then conveyed remotely and through ingestion, commonly called "reading," an
action capable of transforming the inscription back into a mental state. The
thing becomes a thought, and the other way around. The intellectual history of
the Turing machine leads us to a series of thought experiments about the
nature of such transformations. The question of technique continues to haunt
modern poetics. In the process of reading the book escapes the interpreter's
grasp as a thing, presenting itself only as an idea. In asking "How is it
made?" we arrest the advance of symbolism, in an attempt to find the thing
behind the process of signification. This process ultimately ends at the
medium, which today has the added property of being simulated. The paper page
contains no internal states to speak of.  Signification therefore proceeds
from the surface inscription towards the reader. Reading, as Moreno reminds
us, is already an invasive procedure. Absent human contact, we take on the
mental states of others through vehicle that convey a remote kind of agency,
displaced in time and space. It shall be held in view all the more because the
electronic book, unlike paper, does contain internal states of its own which
further interject in the process of signification, transmission, and
translation. How is it made, becomes the question not only for poetics but
also for the politics of reading.

The question of technique ultimately seeks to expose the rules of symbolic
transference between at least three discrete systems: one inorganic, the book,
one symbolic, text, and one biological, body. There is of course a way in
which the three are one: we are all in a sense cyborgs, in an assemblage of
organs, instruments, and inscriptions. But in another sense, poetics asks us
to reflect on the constructed nature of the coupling: the point of contact
being governed by rules of engagement, protocols, and translation tables.
These constructed entities grow and proliferate in a seemingly organic, ad-hoc
manner escaping our attempts at rationalization. They comprise a part of our
received technological a priori. This does not mean that they should be
naturalized or treated with a reverence afforded to nature or to endangered
species. To decouple ourselves from a book, if only momentarily, to reject the
graft, and to discard it or to let it whither, must remain an option. If
poetics lay the grounds for interpretation, we must acknowledge that today,
these grounds lie past the surface of the page. Where literary techniques are
concerned with the transformation between ink and idea, computational
techniques extend the process from pixel to transistor. These are embedded
constructions: they are within and require explication. Techniques of the body
and literary techniques, intertwine in the process of conventional reading.
When reading electronically, they are coupled ever tighter, nearer than the
hand's reach. The Turing machine is an embedded device. Its surfaces span
biological and artificial assemblies.

In the process of textual production, printing and typesetting, it is certain
that my words were mixed with machine language, which in turn changed the
structure of the devices in your lap, in your hand, near to your eye,
embedded, or embodied. I could say that I bear no responsibility for extending
the reach of machine language so close to the reader. But that would be
factually incorrect. The choice of our writing implements and our channels of
communication affect deeply the contexts of interpretation. Such choices, in
aggregate, define the shared ecosystem of knowledge production. Traditional
strategies of close reading which limit interpretation to the parsing of
visible content risk missing the concealed machinations of naked circuit
control. It looks like we are reading books, but this book may change
depending on the reader's race, gender, ethnicity, geography, or political
affiliation. Who authors or authorizes these transformations? Were a book also
a pill or fused with the neural circuitry of the brain, would you know what
and whom you were reading?

Under these conditions, it becomes increasingly more difficult to "hold away"
and to "grasp the object" apart from the subject. Some may celebrate this
moment as a triumph over Cartesian dualism, the deserved decline of humanism,
or the ascendency of a world oriented towards objects. These considerations
risk losing sight of the political reality that the loss of poetics entails.
As I write these words, a North American woman "wearing" an implanted
pacemaker is fighting for her right to access its software, in her words "to
know what code is running inside my body" [@mcgowan_i_2016]. In Pakistan, the
American National Security agency-sponsored Skynet program places people on
the US-sanctioned "disposition matrix" or "kill list" based on predictive
analytics: social network analysis, cellular machine learning, patterns of
travel and telephone use [@mcneal_targeted_2014; @weber_keep_2016]. Automated
tools with names like SMARTTRACKER, SMARTCHART, and Cloud Travel Analytic
"select" people for "target strikes" by unmanned areal vehicles. Willingly, or
not, we are engaged in the political struggle for the control and the
deployment of these codified resources. The heart and the sky are sites on
which the right to inscription are increasingly contested. They require a
capacity to meet the machine and a poetics capable of new emendations.

[^ln1-google]: "Google's mission is to organize the world's information and
make it universally accessible and useful" (@google_about_2015).  See also
Johanna Drucker's discussion on "the totalizing drive of the digital" in
[@drucker_digital_2001, 145].

[^ln1-brains]: For the first view see @putnam_minds_1960 and
@fodor_language_1975. For the second view see @deutsch_quantum_1985 and
@dyson_turings_2012.

[^ln1-inside]: Note that these are also minimal physical requirements for
interpretation: the ability to internalize and to externalize symbolically. My
definitions do imply a sort of a dualism, but not between mind and
body---simply between inside and outside, self and other, I and not-I.  This
has been said before in many ways.

[^ln1-normal]: The process of normalization continues today as contemporary
technologies like natural language processing and optical character recognition
struggle to bring non-regularized writing systems under the computational
umbrella.

[^ln1-pop]: See for example  @drucker_digital_2001; @golumbia_cultural_2009;
@marche_literature_2012.

[^ln1-ceruzzi]: See @ceruzzi_computing_2012, 11 who writes that "the modern
computer is a convergence of separate streams of information handling, each
with its own rich tradition of technological history." "One could add other
antecedents such as the development of radio, motion pictures, and photography"
[@ceruzzi_computing_2012, 11].

[^ln1-compete]: "We may hope that machines will eventually compete with men in
all purely intellectual fields" [@turing_computing_1950, 460].

[^ln1-infinite]: A true universal Turing machine would require a tape that is
infinitely long.

[^ln1-davey]: Mike Davey built and displayed a similar instrument at Harvard
University's Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments in 2012. He
writes, "my goal in building this project was to create a machine that embodied
the classic look and feel of the machine presented in Turing’s paper.  I wanted
to build a machine that would be immediately recognizable as a Turing machine
to someone familiar with Turing's work" [@davey_turing_2012].

[^ln1-cs]: Two separate departments offering competing degrees in software
engineering and computer science is a common occurrence in North American
universities.

[^ln1-caveat]: The institutional distinctions between software engineering and
computer science often hinge on the extent to which the discipline pays heed to
the physical limitations of computing. As usual the situation on the ground is
much more complicated, and the boundaries between software engineering and
computer science are fast eroding. Still, North American students often have
the choice to major in Computer Science or Software Engineering. It would not
be unusual for the one faculty to be located in the School for Liberal Arts and
Science and the other in the School of Engineering. Consider also the two major
professional organizations: Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) and Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). See
@glass_comparative_1992; @parnas_software_1999; @glass_analysis_2004;
@vessey_unified_2005.

[^ln1-notquite]: To what extent a personal computer is a Turing machine is
matter of contention. The Turing machine is a *thought experiment* that
imagines a machine. The PC is a machine emulating the thought experiment. See
@putnam_representation_1988, 121-5; @chalmers_does_1996; @petzold_code:_2000. A
more detailed discussion follows in 1.2.

[^ln1-kant]: Or at least proceeding as if one has agency to structure one's own
experience, despite the overwhelming evidence for determinism.

[^ln1-abstraction]: This is a topic of some contention in the literature. In
his influential paper on the topic, James Moor includes the immateriality of
software as one of the "three myths" of computer science. "As a practical
matter, what we regard as computer instructions, and consequently what we
regard as computer programs, is determined by computers available," he writes
[@moor_three_1978, 215]. Nurbay Irmark argues that software is instead a purely
abstract artifact, akin to a musical work [@irmak_software_2012]. See also
@turner_programming_2013; @colburn_software_1999.

[^ln1-turing]: The intellectual history of the Turing machine is well
established, in multiple works on the subject. It follows the Greek Diophantus,
René Descartes, Georg Cantor, David Hilbert, Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell,
Kurt Gödel, Ludwig Wittgenstein [@petzold_annotated_2008;
@herken_universal_1988; @grattan-guinness_development_1981].

[^ln2-shklov]: I rely on the Russian originals throughout, but will cite the
English translations where possible as well.

[^ln1-descartes]: Descartes writes in his 1637 *Discourse on Method*: "If
there were such machines having the organs and the shape of a monkey or some
other animal that lacked reason, we would have no way of recognizing that they
were not entirely of the same nature as these animals; whereas if there were
any such machines that bore a resemblance to our bodies and imitated our
action as far as this is practically feasible, we would always have two very
certain means of recognizing that they were not at all, for that reason, true
men." Also quoted in @dennett_can_2004, 297.

[^ln1-margin]: The prominence of Turing's voice in the lecture notes could be
attributed to his later prominence.

[^ln1-cope]: See for example @copeland_what_2000 and
@wagner_wittgenstein_2005.

[^ln1-auto]: See for example @heidegger_pathmarks_1998, 57: "For the phenomenon
most worthy of thought and questioning remains the mystery of
language---wherein our entire reflection has to gather itself---above all when
it dawns on us that language is not a work of human beings: language speaks."
See also @blanchot_work_1995, 41.

[^ln1-consensus]: The literature on consensual governance, for example, going
back to Hobbes, Locke, and Mill, often touches on the problem of lapsed
consent. To paraphrase, they ask: What makes whatever compacts made by past
generations still valid today?

[^ln1-timeline]: To give you a sense of the timeline: Turing entered King's
College in 1931 [@hodges_alan_1983, 78]. His paper on computable numbers
appeared in print in 1936. It is likely that the two philosophers met at the
Moral Science Club, where by the 1930s Wittgenstein "monopolized the
discussion," even in the presence of prominent philosophers like George Edward
Moore [@duncan-jones_g._1958, 25]. Turing attended Wittgenstein's lectures on
the foundations of mathematics in 1939. 

[^ln1-anticipate]: As Alonzo Church mentioned in his review of the paper a
year later, Turing's mathematical insight was anticipated by concomitant work
in the field [@church_computable_1937].

[^ln1-platotr]: I translate the passage into literal, if awkward, English to
preserve some of the interesting characteristics of the original Greek. In
particular, note the parallelism between *exōthen* and *endothen*, the
ambiguity of *allotrion*, as something that comes from another, and the subtle
slide between *graphō* (letter, figure, writing) and *tupōn* (type,
impression, trace). I extend my gratitude to Stathis Gourgouris, Simos Zenios,
and Guy Smoot for their help with the Greek translations.

[^ln1-turingcog]: Turing's later work suggests that his use of cognitive
language throughout "On Computable Numbers" was not accidental, and that he
meant it to define sentience more generally [@turing_computing_1950].
