# Chapter 2: Metaphor Machines

Jean Baudrillard's sometimes enigmatic comments on the "genesis of simulacra"
in the late eighties are beginning to come into focus for me only now, at a
time when code has already conquered culture. Today, computers interject
ubiquitously. We drink our morning coffee from brewing machines that use
"fuzzy logic." At night, we go to bed surrounded by smart alarm clocks and
sleep activity monitors. "At the limit of an always increasing elimination of
references and finalities," Baudrillard wrote, "we find 'the programmatic
sign', whose 'value' is purely tactical." Like good theater, we experience the
machine in immersion, suspending disbelief. This leads to what Baudrillard has
called the "ever-increasing loss of resemblances and designations.
[@baudrillard_symbolic_1988, 139-140]" The programmatic sign circumvents
critical reflection in favor of affect. Its value is tactical in the sense
that it appeals to instrumental terms like efficiency, performance,
disruption, and innovation.

Code, as we will encounter it here, elicits pleasure and catharsis. In this,
the programmer and the "user" occupy distinct and unequal positions in the
epistemological hierarchy. Code is not usually meant to be decoded by those it
acts upon. They are spared the "friction" of signification, remaining instead
in the state of asemiosis. In return for such felicity code compels exacting
obedience. Baudrillard thus speaks of the "micromolecular structure of command
and control," as the essence of the programmatic sign
[@baudrillard_symbolic_1988, 139-140]. The appeal to structure at the
molecular level draws our attention to the perils of selective illiteracy. As
inscription, code flows at a layer not immediately perceptible to human
senses. The "users" are thereby confronted with the choice to persist in the
simulation pleasurably or face the difficulty of microscopic reading, which
requires special tools and training. Value is further derived from the
resulting imbalance of critical acumen.

The programmatic sign so conceived splits its energies between the screen and
hard drive. On the screen, at the site of projection, the programmatic sign
simulates familiar materialities: buttons, bins, files, folders, drawers,
desktops, windows, tiles, wood grain, drop shadows, chrome.  At the site of
storage, from which the sign emanates, the language changes to the vocabulary
of control: central processing units, compilation, commitment, extraction,
command, condition, initiation, handling, function, persistence, and
execution. In the rift between the sites of storage---what is---and
projection---what appears to be---the programmatic sign undergoes a series of
structural transformations. What originates from (a) the keyboard as the
mechanical action of a switch becomes (b) an electric signal that (c) leaves a
magnetic mark in computer memory, which (d) morphs into a phase of the liquid
crystal on the screen, leaving behind (e) the letter that emanates outward as
light. Programming languages bridge the passage between bodies, archives, and
screens, breaking thought up into differentiated units for transfer.
Simulation emerges in the reassembly of such units back into a continuous
integrated whole. Texts dissolve into letters and pixels which then congeal
back into holistic literary works.

Roman Jakobson called such construction and deconstruction of meaning the
"profuse exchange of ritualized formulas" or the phatic function of language
[@malinowski_problem_1923, 146; @jakobson_linguistics_1960, 355]. Code, like
the phatic utterance, contains all the stuff that is extra to the content. It
describes the channel of communication: its conditions and rules for
engagement. The words "Hello world" on paper or in plain text format take up
11 bytes. In the Portable Document Format (PDF) they comprise more that 24,000
bytes. The added information contains the kind of profuse exchange of
ritualized formulas that Jakobson describes. Only in this case, the phatic
function is hidden from view. It is more profuse than in speech---Can you hear
me now?---but less visible.

Programming at its essence is a phatic activity. Code shapes and commands. At
the same time, it conjures fantastical metaphors to occlude the structure of
shaping and commanding. The simulacrum created by code obscures the
incongruence between the visible sign and the underlying material affordances
of the medium. What you see is not always what you get. We are instead
confronted with a composite image, which under examination reveals a complex
process of transfiguration between the visible sign and the sign at the site
of the inscription.

The simulation is without a referent. It bears little resemblance to the
material substrata of electronic reading. We believe we are handling a book;
our ideas about reading and interpretation subsequently rely on that initial
physical point of contact with paper. But when reading electronically, we are
handling something other than print material. The semblance to paper guides
our intuitions about the medium and its associated affordances: to scroll,
bookmark, or turn pages. We have far fewer intuitions about the affordances of
inscription at the micromolecular level. As we "turn the page" on the screen
an electric charge embedded into a solid state medium crosses the impenetrable
oxide barrier, reaching its destination, the floating gate, through quantum
tunnelling, which exploits the wave-particle duality of matter and its
corollary the Heisenberg uncertainty principle [@pavan_flash_1997;
@aaron_flash_2002; @bez_introduction_2003]. In this way, the everyday
inscription---the digital word---comprises numerous improbable events at
quantum scale.

What can be said then about the practices of reading and interpretation
grounded in such remote physicalities? For now, only that they continue to
unfold figuratively, removed from the material conditions of knowledge
production. Metaphor sustains our lives in digital worlds artificially, by
analogy with habituated media. We already know what to do with paper; the
electronic book therefore replicates paper. Such metaphors dull the discomfort
of contact between human and machine. They hinder the effort of mastering
poetics at the quantum level: the ability to inject electrons, draw lattices,
manipulate arrays, affect solid states of being. It is tempting to view media
ecosystems that host our digital lives as a kind of a natural element like
water or air. But we should not forget that computational ecologies are always
constructed environments. They are not governed by the laws of physics in the
same sense that clouds or oceans are.  They form a part of a massive tactical
effort to bring private spaces of inhabitance---think the *Home* folder on
your computer, your family photo album, your digital bookmarks---under the
purview of computational control. The simulation encodes political structures
that should not be naturalized, lest we succumb to the complacency of
technological determinism.

My goal in this chapter is therefore to interrupt the frictionless advance of
the computational metaphor: to separate resemblances from their designations,
the apparent shape from a command in the imperative. What does it mean to turn
a page in a medium that sustains neither turning nor pages? I will rely on the
language of cognitive metaphor theory to tell a story of metaphor's influence
on computation, at a formative moment in the history of human-computer
interaction. I approach this tradition from within, taking on its language and
assumptions in the first few sections of the chapter. The latter sections
narrate the historical transition between literal computing, by which users
gave explicit commands to their machines, and the so-called "direct
manipulation" model, in which they began to occupy virtual, figurative
environments. The chapter draws on archives from graphic design, literary
theory, and computer science---fields that come into direct contact in the
1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. The trajectory from the conversational to the
"direct" model of human-computer interaction points to the speculative
possibility of seemingly unmediated, affective coupling between human and
machine---a possibility that I acknowledge and finally reject outright in my
conclusion.

## Verisimilitude

Metaphors structure human habitation within simulated environments. "People do
not think like computers," a group of engineers from Interval Research Group
write in a patent application describing "methods and systems for providing
human/computer interfaces." Metaphors, according to their description, "permit
more efficient and medium independent communications between people and
computers. [@boyden_methods_1999, 1]" Metaphor mediates in the symbolic
transference between human and machine, at the liminal space where two
disparate systems of representation meet to exchange information. "Certain
encoded information is translated into certain decoded information," the
engineers conclude [@boyden_methods_1999].

Interfaces translate machine states---the configuration of open and closed
circuits---into pictures, numbers, and letters, all species of human cognitive
states. A computer is, in essence, a system for such metaphoric transference
of properties. "A user interface is represented on the display screen in the
form of metaphoric objects, called icons" writes another group of engineers,
in employ by the Xerox Corporation. "An icon may be a representation of a
virtual object, such as a virtual floppy disk," they continue. Crucially, the
virtual object may be accessible either in what the authors referred to as the
"host system world" or in the "emulating processor world," even when the
"virtual floppy disk may have a filing system alien to the host system world.
[@beard_data_1990, 1]" In other words, the arrangement of information on the
screen---the poetics of emulated space---may be incompatible with the
arrangement of electromagnetic charges on the floppy disk itself---the poetics
of inscription.

To reflect on the function of metaphor in everyday computation, consider the
following passage from a patent filed by Xerox in 1991. It describes an
"electronic library metaphor," which includes:

> a shared books with data base metaphor, a reference books metaphor, and
> a card catalog metaphor in one system that allows large object oriented data
> bases to be organized and accessed in an exclusive environment and in
> addition allows access to screen icons, creates a visual hierarchy of
> related and shared objects, and allows mutually exclusive access to the
> metaphors within the library [@pajak_electronic_1992, 1].

The invention ultimately enables the "organizing, accessing, and querying of
information unique to physical libraries in an electronic workstation
environment" [@pajak_electronic_1992, 1]. Set aside, for a moment, the
peculiarity of being able to patent a metaphor and instead note the
idiosyncrasy of the technical language. What does it mean to "access" a
metaphor, for example?  Were someone to "check out" a book from the electronic
library, would they hold onto a book or its metaphor alone? What mechanisms
would assure the integrity between a database and its metaphor? Is the visual
hierarchy of related objects itself an object in that hierarchy? Traditional
metaphor theory strains to answer such questions.

Traditional metaphor theorists saw metaphor as a linguistic phenomenon. To say
"the day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops" is to use the verb "stand"
in a novel linguistic context. Days have no literal legs to stand on. But in
the 1980's, scholars including John Searle, George Lakoff, Mark Turner argued
that metaphors are more broadly a cognitive phenomenon, which maps distinct
ontological categories across "conceptual domains" [@lakoff_metaphors_1980;
@turner_death_1987; @lakoff_contemporary_1998, @searle_metaphor_1998]. In the
modified view, even such basic semantic concepts as "quantity, state, change,
action, cause, purpose, means, modality" are metaphorical in nature
[@lakoff_metaphorical_1980; @lakoff_contemporary_1998, 212]. Lakoff and others
have further argued that beyond figurative, lyrical language, metaphors more
broadly structure everyday experience.[^ln1-analogy] Thus the analysis of
common phrases like "things are looking up" and "I can't get that tune out of
my mind" reveals the underlying figuration like "good things are up" and "the
mind is a container." The idea that "good things are up" generates a multitude
of metaphors like "profits are going up" and "moving on up," for example
[@lakoff_metaphorical_1980, 195-198].

[^ln1-analogy]: It bears mentioning at the outset that in the language of
cognitive metaphor theory all figurative tropes of comparison---hyperbole,
metonymy, synecdoche, or simile---fall under the category of metaphor. 

!["An exemplary interface for viewing a three dimensional book [@card_methods_2006, 3]."](images/book-metaphor.png)

!["Alternate display techniques for information about a big book [@card_methods_2006,4]."](images/book-3d.png)

In the cognitive view, the metaphor performs a number of "conventional
mappings from one domain to another" [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 239]. Lakoff
mentions for example the common trope of "a state is a person," implicit in
the ideas of "friendly" and "hostile" states [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 243].
This metaphor implies that ideas about agency, emotion, and mental life
usually attached to people can be extended to state actors. Similarly, to say
that someone is "boiling mad," instantiates the common trope of "anger is a
hot liquid in a container." In this case, familiar properties attached to the
domain of physics are mapped onto the domain of emotion. Lakoff explains that
such domain mappings tend to also follow a few rules. "Mappings are not
arbitrary," he writes, "but grounded in the body and in everyday experience
and knowledge." Finally domain mappings obey what Lakoff calls the Invariance
Principle, by which "the image schema structure of the source domain is
projected onto the target domain in a way that is consistent with inherent
target domain structure."[^ln1-metalakoff] Keep these rules in mind as they
will become important later on in our conversation.

The kind of resemblances that we have been discussing so far---between the
document and its icon, for example---are further referred to as *structural
metaphors*. "Structural metaphors allow us to do much more than just orient
concepts," Lakoff and Johnson wrote in the 1980s. Grounded in "systematic
correlations within our experience," structural metaphors transfer organizing
principles from one domain to another [@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 61-8]. Thus to
say "the world is our oyster" is to suggest that something in our approach to
interacting with oysters resembles our approach to life. The ease of eating
one transfers to the ease of living in the other. The transferred property
implies more than a semantic similarity, one of meaning, but also a structural
one, one of interface. The metaphor suggests the world is arranged like an
oyster somehow, that it can be cracked, and that it contains a tasty hidden
morsel within. In this way, structural metaphors organize one thing in the
shape of another. They are tools for extending insight from a known domain to
a lesser known one, holding great explanatory and exploratory power where
simple things like oysters shed light on complex things like worlds.

In their capacity for exploration and explanation, metaphor machines present
us with a special case of conceptual domain blending in that they enact,
rather than merely suggest, the transference of structuring principles from
one system to another (from "physical libraries" to "electronic workstations
environments," in the above example). Metaphors that can be touched and
handled in some way exist neither wholly in language nor wholly in the mind.
Rather, they operate in action, at hand. John Carrol, one of the pioneers in
the field of human-computer interaction, summarized the role of metaphors in
the design of computing systems as follows:

> Professional programmers might learn a new system X by metaphorizing at least
initially from what they already know about system Y. More casual or naive
end-users might rely on metaphors drawn from more distant knowledge domains,
e.g. on what they have already learned about electric typewriters. [...] The
implications of this proposal are simple and direct. If people employ metaphors
in learning about computing systems, the designers of those systems should
anticipate and support likely metaphorical constructions to increase the ease
of learning and using the system [@carroll_metaphor_1982, 107-108].

In essence, Carroll imagines human-computer interfaces that incorporate
Lakoff's and Johnson's "conceptual blending" in practice. In this way, the
simulacrum of a familiar gesture of discarding a crumpled piece of paper into
the waste bin can guide the deletion of electronic documents.

Apple's influential *Human Interface Guidelines*, at the core of Apple's
desktop interfaces in the 1980s and today, echoes Carroll's proscriptions:

> You can take advantage of people's knowledge of the world around them by
using metaphors to convey concepts and features of your application. Use
metaphors involving concrete, familiar ideas and make the metaphors plain, so
that users have a set of expectations to apply to computer environments.  For
example, people often use file folders to store paper documents in their
offices. Therefore, it makes sense to people to store computer documents in
computer-generated folders that look like file folders. People can organize
their hard disks in a way that's analogous to the way they organize their file
cabinets [@apple_apple_1987, 4].

Apple's designers understood that the mapping of concepts between the physical
and the computer-generated worlds is imperfect. For example, unlike a
real-world file folder, constrained by the size of its containing cabinet, a
computer folder can hold a nearly unlimited amount of files. Or, to be more
precise, the electronic folder metaphor is subject to different constraints
than those that limit the use of paper files. The image of a paper file should
not therefore restrict the possibilities of what can be done to a digital
file, the manual explains. The designer is to "strike a balance between the
metaphor's suggested use and the ability of the computer to support and extend
the metaphor" [@apple_apple_1987, 5]. The user handling a virtual folder must
recognize its capabilities beyond those suggested by its image. Some
attributes of the paper domain map onto the virtual, while other do not.
Furthermore, the virtual contains possibilities not conveyed by the original
vehicle.

A number of patents from IBM, Xerox, and Microsoft similarly evoke the logics
of structural metaphor and domain blending. Consider US Patent #5,907,854 by
Paula J. Cox et.al. of International Business Machines. The invention describes
"a library metaphor that allows a user to organize the online books in a manner
that has meaning and utility." The authors continue to explain that while "the
actual books may be stored in many separate and distinct locations [...] the
bookcase provides a familiar classification system." Further, they write that
the creation of bookcase metaphors must involve "the creation of appropriate
links to the actual online book/bookshelf/bookcase." The "book metaphor"
ultimately "provides an easy to understand and intuitive model for a user who
might not be familiar with on-line viewing tools" [@cox_method_1999].

Another metaphor machine can be found in the collaboration between the
influential product design firm IDEO and Xerox in the 1990s. The two worked on
an early file manager shell called PC Catalog, later renamed TabWorks. In
describing the design process, IDEO developers wrote about defining "key
elements of the metaphor" contained in the image of "tabs" and "catalogs."
"The book *cover*," they wrote, "opened to display three *rings* binding a set
of divider *tabs*, each containing one or more *pages*." Pages, in turn
contained *items* or "icons representing documents or applications"
[@moll-carrillo_articulating_1995, 572]. In a similar binder-based software
application, the engineers at IBM describe the "contents of the notebook
metaphor," which are "displayed as a stack of sheets." "The interface [...]
permits a user to directly manipulate the sheets in the notebook metaphor"
[@glaser_graphical_1995].

In these words we begin to glimpse the trouble with the structural metaphor
paradigm of human-computer interaction. The idea of "direct manipulation"
refers to the object's immediate availability to hand. But, users *do not*
handle the object directly. They take hold of metaphors. The mechanisms of the
actions associated with the object---turn the page, delete a document---are
occluded in favor of their mimetic representations. Images of papers and pages
stand in for floating gates and electromagnetic charges. This subtle sleight
of hand, by which the manipulation of metaphors appears a "direct" action,
where metaphors subsume things, will continue to haunt our conversation.

## Dissimulation

Readers know how paragraphs, pages, files, and folders relate to paper and
would like for their digital images to behave in a similar way. The principles
of metaphor-driven design contain an implicit model of human-computer
interaction, which suggests that humans prefer to manipulate digital
information stored on computational media by the means of familiar mediating
structures---paragraphs, pages, files, and folders---associated figuratively
with the affordances of print media. For example, one affordance of paper is
that it can be folded. It therefore becomes possible to "earmark" a page by
folding a corner. Patently, digital media cannot (as of yet) fold by the way
of paper. Readers seeking a mechanism for digital recollection may not be
familiar with the affordances of the newly inhabited medium. Consequently, the
affordances of digital media are presented through metaphor. In this way, a
virtual "earmark" on a "page" represents a numerical pointer to a specific
address in the computer memory. A "page" stands for a range of related
addresses that correspond roughly to the information visible on an analogous
page in print. Similarly, one "drops a folder into a trash bin" or "drags and
drops a file" or "bookmarks a page" on a screen. Such metaphors rely on
habituated insight with one medium extended into another. We do not literally
"drag" or "drop" bits, but we use metaphors of paper and trashcans to help us
manipulate bits and bytes as if they were household objects. The metaphor
opens figurative possibilities. It also obscures actual physical contingencies
of interacting with bits and bytes, logic gates and electromagnetic traces.

Metaphorical substitution encourages readers to extend their facility with one
sort of media (paper and ink) to another (screen and pixels). But, what
readers gain in facility, they lose in critical faculty. Alienated from the
material conditions of information storage and retrieval, readers gain access
to the metaphor alone. Thus we go through the motions of "turning the page"
but in actuality redraw the screen. We "highlight a passage," which
constitutes an action that may also send information about the highlighted
passage to a data aggregation service. We "share a book" which really means
assigning a temporary license to another user. Where does the text go? I ask
when downloading a paper from an online journal.[^ln1-nested] It is in your
home folder someone answers. But unless one of us is familiar with the
material contingencies of file storage, neither has a mental map of any
physical location corresponding to the "home" folder, the default location of
personal files on many systems. When confronted with the actual affordances of
digital text, the user grasps for neutered metaphors. We "reside" in such
"homes," "own," "share," and "create" only in the simulacrum.

Interface metaphors conceal structures of algorithmic governance and control
over the transmission of symbolic goods. Print offers a relatively static and
stable medium by comparison. Ink and paper do not change much in transit. By
contrast, the vessels of computation are capable of altering their contents
dynamically. Imagine my asking you to read Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, for
example, in lending you a copy of the text. I am fairly certain that the text
will remain unaltered as I pass the book into your hands. By contrast, the
computed sign adjusts itself to new contexts. An electronic version of
*Hamlet* could change based on the new reader's geographic location, mood, or
consumption habits. In fact, most texts we consume today come to us in such a
computationally constructed way. The front page of the *New York Times* viewed
in Beijing will differ from that viewed in New York. The two "pages" or
"sites" are in some sense two completely different textual variants. In
another sense, the "front page" identifies the same location of the same text,
in two diverging and dynamically composed versions. Whatever is meant by
"today's edition of the *New York Times*" in that sense, denotes differing
surface phenomena that emanate from the same source.

The key to understanding the "loss of resemblances" that accompanies ubiquitous
simulation lies in the inner dynamics of the metaphor machinery. A functioning
metaphor, if you would recall from Lakoff, is one which transfers structural
properties of one domain into another. Thus to say "life is a stage" is to
transpose something about theater onto life. In literary terms, the theater is
"tenor" where "life" is "vehicle" of the composite figure
[@richards_philosophy_1936, 96-7]. Simulations work differently. Where the
tenor of the literary metaphor *transfers* properties across domains, the
computational metaphor *substitutes* them, confusing the "signs of the real for
the real" [@baudrillard_simulacra_1994, 2]. It is a subtle difference that
engenders not-so-subtle effects. For example, it would be one thing to say "you
are the apple of my eye" and quite another to confuse apples for eye pupils.
Baudrillard gives us the example of a map that no longer corresponds to any
territory. He calls such a condition of pure simulation without a referent
hyperreality.

Hyperreality emanates from the momentum of the expected correspondence between
representation and the thing being represented. For example, one expects a
weather simulation to model actual observed meteorological conditions. Would
it still be a weather simulation if the model was broken in some way, or, in
the extreme, if it had no correspondence to the physics of clouds, wind, and
water whatsoever? The hyperreal model breaks further still by usurping,
instead of imitating or merely obscuring, the underlying reality. It begins to
simulate itself, according to its own rules, entering a state of
dissimulation. Such dissimulation no longer corresponds to any conditions "on
the ground." Severed from its referent, the sign attains the status of the
thing represented: a map of a map, a symbol that folds onto itself, a weather
simulation confused for weather.

We know that physical affordances of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and
electromagnetic storage differ drastically from those of paper, goat skins, or
parchment. For example, an English-language character occupies eight basic
units of information (bits) on a disk where a print character occupies one
basic unit (letter). The disk can tolerate millions of rewrites, where the
paper medium wears out after only a few. The paper inscription is visible to
the naked eye where the digital inscription is not. Still, the simulation
maintains the illusion of similarity. We encounter what is called
*skeuomorphic* design, by which screen reading retains the ornaments of print.
In this way, an electronic book reader mimics the bent corner of a
well-thumbed book. Skeuomorphic metaphors extend visual cues from one medium
to another. The reader already knows how to turn pages of a book. A book
device therefore simulates pages to ease the cognitive burden of transitioning
from paper to pixel. Instead of issuing arcane commands meant for the machine
to turn the page, readers perform the more habituated motion of swiping across
the screen. The gliding motion enacts a kinetic analogy---a type of a
metaphor---as if to transpose properties of paper to glass.

The more convincing its simulacrum, the more our grasp on the medium weakens.
By definition, simulation "assumes a form resembling that of something else,"
whereby one referent is exchanged for another [@_simulation_2015]. To drag and
drop a document into a trashcan on the screen, for example, should in theory
correspond to an analogous set of data manipulations on the disk. Yet,
"discarding a file" in this manner does not necessarily include deletion of
data from the storage medium, as expected. The representation of the document
may disappear visually where the electromagnetic inscription endures. Such
"loss of resemblances" could remain insignificant. Does one care whether a
file was actually erased or not when performing deletion? Perhaps not. But in
some cases, when it really matters---under the threat of censorship or
prosecution, for example---the incongruence exposes the frailty of our
alienation from the material contexts of digital labor. Under duress, facing
unjust prosecution, one may demand the thing to stay deeply deleted. The
problem of metaphoric immediacy reappears in the unfulfilled promise of
mimesis. In many contexts, the metaphoric vehicle claims to bridge domains and
to ferry content across faithfully, without meddling or damaging its contents.
But if the metaphor does meddle---if it mediates while dissembling and
dissimulating---by what process can one ensure the efficacy of transference?
What entity makes good on the promise of verisimilitude?

Readers ultimately bear the burden of such unverified conceptual transference.
In pretending to turn virtual pages, we lose sight of the mechanisms that give
rise to dissimulation. If we hope to practice anything like interpretation or
close reading at the level of discourse, we must certainly also practice them
at the physical site of discourse formation. A truly materialist poetics would
reach through representation towards the medium. More than superficial
embellishment, the skeuomorphic metaphor enacted at the surface of the digital
literary device structures all higher order meaning-carrying units: from
individual letters to words, paragraphs, chapters, pages, and books.

Why would readers engage in such a charade? Why not simply make use of novel
interfaces afforded by new technology? The literature from the field of
human-computer interaction suggests a formalist answer: habituation [See
@carroll_metaphor_1982; @carroll_interface_1987; @spolsky_user_2001]. The
initial effort it takes to learn to read in a new environment may discourage
potential readers from adopting a new technology. Smart designers therefore
rely on acculturated practice, the turning of pages in our case, to minimize
the "friction" of adoption. Digital poems, novels, physician's scripts, and
legal contracts resemble their paper counterparts in order to enable familiar
actions. But while imitating paper pages, the reading appliance also monitors,
adjusts, warns, and controls.

Dissimulation conceals structuring principles large and small. Some of the
occluded details remain inconsequential, like the limit on how many keys can
be pressed at once without overwhelming the circuitry of the keyboard when
typing.  Other concealed details are of paramount importance, like digital
rights management chips and censorship filters. Electronic books are governed
and internalize governing structures in ways that are often purposefully
hidden from the reader. For example, the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act
prohibits the physical circumvention of copyright protections [See
@ku_critique_2004; @ginsburg_legal_2005; @perzanowski_rethinking_2008;
@fry_circumventing_2009; @von_lohmann_unintended_2010]. This means that if an
electronic book is encrypted in some way to prevent copyright infringement,
the reader may also be prevented from examining codes and codices embedded
into the device---rules governing accessibility, preservation, or freedom of
speech. The material affordances of inscription at that deep, bottom-most
meaning-bearing medium influence all higher-level practices of
interpretation.[^ln1-rmedium]

Traditional theories of textual interpretation rely on properties and
assumptions attached to print media. For example, in Hans-Georg Gadamer's
influential conception of art, the free play of the artistic mind transforms
into material structure [*Gebilde*] that is both "repeatable" and "permanent"
[@gadamer_truth_1975, 110]. Similarly, in his *Interpretation Theory*, Paul
Ricoeur wrote about the "range of social and political changes" related to the
invention of writing. To the stability of communication in print Ricoeur
attributes the "birth of political rule exercised by a distant state" and "the
birth of market relationships." The constitution of archives enables history,
where the fixity of law, justice. "Such an immense range of effects suggests
that human discourse is not merely preserved from destruction," Ricoeur writes.
It is also "deeply affected in its communicative function"
[@ricoeur_interpretation_1976, 26-8]. The electronic literary device offers no
such permanence. What is meant by "fixed," "permanent," and "repeatable"
changes with the device. Such properties come to us under the guise of surface
representation. Nothing is guaranteed in the passage of electronic text from
one pair of hands into another. Formatting expands its purview far beyond
typographical convention. The erasure of words, word substitution, automatic
summarization, wholesale generation of discourse by algorithmic means---the
command and control layer implicit in all digital media contains all such
possibilities. What does it mean to read and to interpret a dynamic text, which
changes depending on its context? How can literary analysis---close reading,
philology, hermeneutics---persist without the fixity of print?

![Formal structures at the site of the inscription. "Perspective view of a
portion of a charge translating device illustrating a preferred electrical
contact arrangement. A quantum of charge carriers, representing an information
bit [...] can be translated along the semiconductor [...] sweeping the
minority carriers with it. The quantum can be detected by a simple capacitive
couple, e.g., a floating gate FET" [@boyle_information_1974].](images/floating-gate.png)

Dissimulation is perhaps necessary, because the reading and writing of digital
data can involve processes far outside of everyday experience. For example, in
reading data from solid state (FLASH) memory, a circuit imparts electrical
charge through quantum tunneling onto a connected series of floating gate
transistors [See @pavan_flash_1997; @bez_introduction_2003]. Whatever the
complexities of solid state storage architecture, the difference in the
structure of information on pages and floating gates is apparent. The
arrangement of one has only an arbitrary connection to the other. Consequently
changes in the structure of the symbolic domain, which manifest in the erasure
of words on the screen for example, do not necessitate corresponding changes
in the physical domain, which in the same example manifest in the discharge of
the floating gate. The information endures despite the intended erasure.
Dwellers of virtual realms believe in verisimilitude as a matter of faith. We
hope for the analogy of turning pages or erasing words on the screen to entail
similar actions on the disk. But we waver when asked to authenticate the
particulars of the simulation. At times, "erased" data is simply hidden from
view. At other times, instead of disappearing it proliferates across deep
surfaces, shared without consent with agents not privy to the original
contexts of inscription. As was the case with Baudrillard's map, the metaphor
of reading and writing digitally breaks in that it no longer resembles any
familiar terrain. Dissimulation mimics familiar materialities absent their
actual physics. It suggests a structuring of one kind, while enacting the
structure of another.

Micromolecular writing, of the kind suggested already in Kittler and
Baudrillard in the 1990s, today demands the corresponding practice of
microscopic reading [@kittler_there_1995]. I imagine here the inverse of
Kittler's literature without humans: cryptic, illegible, and under the
conditions of high technology. The methodology of computational poetics
insists on recovering the shape of the inscription, across surfaces and
domains, making the full extent of the dissimulating figure available for
interpretation.

What happens in the metaphorical transformation between a book---or any
inscription---as cognitive artifact and the apparatus simulating that artifact?
Estrangement, the exegesis of the metaphor, can help reveal the mechanisms of
governance in the structural transference from one medium to another.
Materialist poetics can subsequently allow one to consent, or, conversely,
resist elements of imposed structure. That is not to say that meaning-making
structures can ever become fully transparent or produce plain, unambiguous
meaning. Unlike a cypher, the plain text is one that does not preclude the
possibility of interpretation or misinterpretation. In the continuum between
total legibility and illegibility, the digital texts that we read today occupy
a space somewhere right of center. They are illegible in part. The simulation
of print, the digital metaphor, decays rapidly with time. Archivists know this
problem well: digital texts from the recent past can quickly become
inaccessible as the software used to decode them itself passes into oblivion.

<!-- consider a segway, a bit abrupt here -->

## Death and Incongruence

In poetics, a metaphor is said to be "motivated" when a number of concepts
from one domain extends into another to produce insight
[@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 210-1]. Lakoff explains that to say "to spin one's
wheels" when referring to someone who is thinking is to apply the reader's
knowledge of automobiles to the mental realm. Wheels that spin without moving
the vehicle forward waste energy. The metaphor suggests that something similar
happens mentally as well [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 211].

In his influential essay on metaphor the English literary critic I.A. Richards
wrote that "when we use metaphor we have two thoughts of different things
active together and supported by a single word, or phrase, whose meaning is a
resultant of their interaction" [@richards_philosophy_1936, 95]. Richards's
radical contribution to the study of metaphor lay in the observation that
metaphor operates in language, thought, and action ubiquitously. It does not,
as previously thought, exist merely in the realm of poetic language. Thought
in itself, Richards believed, is metaphoric in that the mind continually
searches for patterns and comparisons [@richards_philosophy_1936, 94]. The
motivated metaphor produces insight: a tool to explore and to make sense of
the world. By such means the known sheds light onto the unknown.

Some metaphors are, in this figurative way, more productive than others. The
poetic use of the metaphor does not merely carry meaning across known
domains---it produces new and unexpected connections between them. To this
effect, Richards cites Percy Shelley who wrote the following in defense of
poetry:

> [poetic] language is vitally metaphorical; that is, it marks the before
> unapprehended relations of things and perpetuates their apprehension, until
> the words which represent them, become, through time, signs for portions or
> classes of thoughts instead of pictures of integral thoughts; and then if no
> new poets should arise to create afresh the associations which have been
> thus disorganized, language will be dead to all the nobler purposes of human
> intercourse [@shelley_essays_1840].

In highlighting the continually regenerative power of the poetic metaphor,
Shelley anticipated what the cognitive school of metaphor theory was to
confirm by empirical means more than a century later [@mojtabai_delusion_2000;
@billig_metaphor_2005]. Metaphors do not "die" as such. They continue to live,
but also become naturalized: that is, understood literally. They create
connections, which with time become habituated and invisible. Taken for
literal truth, the metaphor loses its quality of mediation or literally
"ferrying across."[^ln1-greek] The idea of a "dead metaphor," for example,
itself no longer evokes death. The metaphor withers: once the connotation is
lost, it becomes a denotative statement lacking any exploratory or explanatory
potential. In Shelley's view, all metaphors are destined to become habituated
in this way, only to be reborn again in poetry. In their most generative form,
metaphors produce new meaning.

The creative juxtaposition between two as before unrelated conceptual domains
brings novel aspects of experience to light. With time, the poetic metaphor no
longer perpetuates understanding; it becomes an instrumental shortcut, a
commonplace. In the words of Viktor Shklovsky: we "cease to experience" the
trope [@shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914]. Vilém Flusser put it another way in
writing that habituated idiom proceeds "smoothly," giving us no pause, without
"bumps or interruptions" [@flusser_freedom_2003, 13 and 82].

Lakoff famously took exception to the idea of dead metaphors, arguing that
even those metaphors that are thoroughly habituated can play a vital part in
structuring everyday experience. He gave the example of the sentence: *He
still can't quite grasp the basic ideas of quantum mechanics*. Grasping, in
this case, is used as a synonym to "understanding." It indicates a
transference of properties between physical (grasping) and mental
(understanding) realms. Despite being commonplace, the metaphor is alive,
Lakoff argued, because it continues to perform a function, naming a mental
activity that we would otherwise find difficult to explain with precision.
Such a metaphor is less dead than other, perhaps more novel, "one off" poetic
tropes that fail to circulate widely [@lakoff_death_1987]. The metaphor dies
in the sense of being overused, but it dies also in another sense for not
being used at all.

A truly dead metaphor for Lakoff is one in which the original source image no
longer makes sense. He gives the example of the English word *pedigree*, which
originally referred to the French for "crane's foot," or *pied de grue*. The
foot was historically used in a typographical flourish to decorate familial
tree diagrams.

In the previous example, when we spoke of the metaphorical "grasping" of
ideas, both sides of the domain transference were readily available to us. We
understood something about grasping things and extended it to the capacity of
the mind to take hold of ideas. By contrast, the average English speaker no
longer perceives the *pied de grue* contained within the English *pedigree*.
In the case of a commonplace, the metaphor is merely tired from frequent use,
whereas it is completely dead in the crane's foot example. All habituated
metaphors like "grasping ideas" and "pedigree" lose a measure of their
symbolic connotation with time. Unlike "pedigree," however, the metaphorical
nature of "grasping ideas" is at least available for casual interpretation. It
therefore retains it generative powers. According to Lakoff, the underlying
metaphor "the mind is like a hand" produces other meaningful phrases like "you
have to *let go* of this idea." The crane's foot in the English "pedigree" by
contrast has stopped generating novel connections. The conventional notion of
dead metaphors, Lakoff objects, does not appropriately differentiate between
the two cases of metaphor dysfunction [@lakoff_death_1987;
@muller_metaphors_2008]. The metaphor sometimes "dies" but continues to
produce new linkages, as is the case with grasping ideas. At other times, the
metaphor dies in the sense of one domain becoming no longer accessible to its
user, as is the case with pedigree.

Furthermore, note that a wholly unmotivated metaphor does not live at all.
Thus the Mad Hatter poses his famous nonsensical riddle in Lewis Carroll's
*Alice in Wonderland*: How is a raven like a writing desk? The complete
dissimilarity between the two domains---of animals and furniture---prevents
any productive congruence.[^ln1-carroll] No domain mapping happens between
ravens and writing desks. Not having been born, the metaphor dies in yet
another sense.

With these comments on broken and dead metaphors in mind, I return to the kind
of metaphors we have been discussing earlier in the chapter---the kind found
on computer screens---to ask: How does the interface metaphor live or die by
the above definitions?

When we discards a document into the wastepaper basket, to return to our
recurring example, we intuitively expect the computer to erase it. This would
fulfill Lakoff's invariance principle, which, if you would recall, describes
the projection of structure from the source domain *in a way that is
consistent with the inherent structure of the target domain*
[@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 215]. But the computer does not do this. We "empty
the dustbin," but have no means to verify whether the transference of
properties took place or not. Our ability to actually erase data stands in an
arbitrary relationship to the depicted figure. The metaphor breaks almost as
badly as the transference between desks and ravens. Indeed, the act of
"emptying the trashcan" ceases to be a metaphor at all; it no longer anything.
The transferred properties are not simply missing in transit, they are
manifestly misrepresented.

<!-- check the segway -->

## Mimesis

"An interface is by nature a form of artistic imitation: a *mimesis*," Brenda
Laurel wrote in her important 1984 essay "Interface as Mimesis." She went on
to argue that "if designing interfaces feels like painting on cave walls by
flickering torchlight, it is only because we, the designers, have not availed
ourselves of better illumination: the science of the mimetic arts, poetics"
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 67]. Laurel, who started her academic career
in theater studies, went on to work for Apple, Activision, Atari, and Sun
Microsystems among other companies. Her work, widely cited in technical
literature, reminds us of the close connection between poetics and the
architecture of human-computer interaction. It is all the more important
today, as immersive computational environments begin to structure experience
beyond the merely instrumental. Computers increasingly mediate in the
interface between the public and the private, art and politics, mind and body.
The simulacrum requires that we advance a reflective "science of the mimetic
arts" lest we lose a sense of what Michael Taussig has called the "space
ulterior to mimesis" [@taussig_mimesis_1993, 129-144]. The suspension of
disbelief must remain, as it was in Samuel Coleridge's original formulation, a
willful act, containing further a "semblance of truth" required to animate the
shadows of imagination [@coleridge_biographia_1917, 6-7]. An involuntary or
worse yet forced suspension of disbelief can only lead to a state of total
critical disempowerment.

The history of human-computer interaction passes through several distinct
stages, each defined by their relationship to representation:

A) Early computers were programmed by physically manipulating a complex
arrangement of wires and relays. With time, that configuration could be
abstracted into symbolic states, signified by visible marks on paper and later
invisible electromagnetic marks on tape. In the next stage of development, the
physical arrangement of gates and relays was further codified into an
artificial language. The programmer operated with a constrained vocabulary,
receiving messages in response, in a dialog resembling human communication.

B) As the use of computers spread, the paradigm of so called "direct
interaction" shifted emphasis from verbal cues to visual and from symbol to
icon. The communication was and continues to be direct in the sense of felt
immediacy and immersion. By comparison to the verbal symbol, an icon appears
to have a relationship to the remote materialities of computational media less
arbitrary than the symbol.

C) Finally, one imagines an indexical connection between human and machine, by
which brain states and machine states could correspond through a physical
rather than merely visual linkage. The so called direct neural interfaces
bypass inscription---word and picture---altogether, making use of
neuroprosthetics---implants and surface electrodes---to connect human and
machine.

It would be wrong however to accept "direct manipulation" at face value. In
the transition between brain states and machine configurations, a
morphological grammar always intercedes. It sets the rules of engagement,
which underscores the political importance of holding the mechanisms of
mediation in critical view.

Before the 1980s, the dominant paradigm of interacting with machines was the
dialog [@shaw_joss:_1964; @cameron_dialog:_1967; @gaines_timesharing_1986;
@martin_computerized_1970; @martin_design_1973]. Already in 1950, Alan Turing
imagined a conversation between an artificially intelligent poet and its
critic:

>`Interrogator:` In the first line of your sonnet which reads "Shall I compare
thee to a summer's day," would not "a spring day" do as well or better?  
>`Witness:` It wouldn't scan.  
>`Interrogator:` How about "a winter's day," That would scan all right.  
>`Witness:` Yes, but nobody wants to be compared to a winter's day.  
>`Interrogator:` Would you say Mr. Pickwick reminded you of Christmas?  
>`Witness: In a way.  
>`Interrogator:` Yet Christmas is a winter's day, and I do not think Mr. Pickwick
would mind the comparison.  
>`Witness:` I don't think you're serious. By a winter's day one means a typical
winter's day, rather than a special one like Christmas
[@turing_computing_1950].  

The goal of conversational programming was to provide a similarly naturalized
dialog between the operator and the machine. Although machine understanding of
informal human speech does not develop in earnest until the twenty-first
century, interactive computing environments like DIALOG and JOSS were designed
to lessen the cognitive burden of speaking machine languages by translating
them into dialog systems that understood a limited number of English words.
JOSS, an experimental on-line computing system created by the RAND corporation
in 1963, consisted of a typewriter connected to the JOHNNIAC computer. Prior
to JOSS, programmers would interact with the JOHNNIAC machine via keyboard and
punch card, initially using octal number notation and then binary assembly
language [@gruenberger_history_1979]. These methods of programming were time
consuming and prone to error. "An octal desk calculator was nice to have," a
historian of the system would later quip [@gruenberger_history_1979, 58]. 

The JOSS experiment introduced the idea of an "interpreter" that sat between
the human operator and the machine, facilitating communication in a friendly,
conversational manner. Think of JOSS as the "user's computing aide and a
single contact with the computer," the engineers wrote [@shaw_joss:_1964,
456]. Instead of feeding punch cards into the mechanism, as was done before,
the operator would now use a standard typewriter. Instead of flipping switches
the operator typed words. JOSS thus referred both to the "simple language" for
machine instruction and to this new "remote console" way of interacting with
the computer. JOSS and the user would "take turns controlling the typewriter"
in the words of the documentation. The interpreter understood simple commands
like `do`, `go`, and `type`, which it would then translate into machine
instructions. When encountering an unspecified command, the interpreter
mimicked human confusion, responding simply: "Eh?  [@shaw_joss:_1964]"

This mode of conversational interaction was captured also in one of the
earliest text adventure games, the *Colossal Cave Adventure*, designed by Will
Crowther in 1975 [@montfort_twisty_2003]. The following dialog illustrates the
call-and-response game play typical of the genre:

> `You are standing at the end of a road before a small brick building. Around
you is a forest. A small stream flows out of the building and down a gully.`
>
>`> enter`
>
> `You are inside a building, a well house for a large spring. There are some
keys on the ground here. There is a shiny brass lamp nearby. There is food
here. There is a bottle of water here.`
>
>`> get keys`
>
> `OK`
>
>`> get lamp`
>
> `OK`
>
>`> exit`
>
> `You're at end of road again.`

Although much more accessible and interactive than communication in octal or
binary machine code, the conversational model posed several significant
challenges to the machine user. It was meant to resemble human communication
in all its richness and variety, where in fact the machine "spoke" and
"understood" only a limited number of words. Researchers from the U.S. Air
Force academy would write:

> The lower cost of computer access and the proliferation of on-line systems
produced a new breed of users, people whose expertise was in some area other
than computer technology. As their initial fascination with conversational
computing wore off, users reported experiencing feelings of intense
frustration and of being "manipulated" by a seemingly unyielding, rigid,
intolerant dialogue partner [@walther_-line_1974, 379;
@gaines_timesharing_1986, 15].

The conversational intermediary of *Colossal Cave Adventure* understood roughly
295 commands, and knew about 1,600 words in response, arranged into several
hundred canned phrases.[^ln1-count] Faced with an unfamiliar word, it could
only repeat "That's not a verb I recognise."

By the 1980s, a new breed of metaphorical interfaces gained widespread
prominence. If *Colossal Cave Adventure* epitomized the conversational model
of computing, games like *Pong*, *Space Invaders*, and *Donkey Kong* heralded
the paradigm of "direct manipulation." According to Ben Shneiderman, the
researcher who coined the term in 1982, direct manipulation involved three key
principles:

1. Continuous representation of the object of interest.
2. Physical actions or labelled button presses instead of complex syntax.
3. Rapid incremental reversible operations whose impact on the object of
interest is immediately visible [@shneiderman_future_1982, 251;
@hutchins_direct_1986, 91].

The primary goal of direct manipulation was therefore to achieve
correspondence between "representation" and the "object of interest."
Shneiderman looked to Leibniz for guidance. Leibniz developed a system of
symbolic notation, at the root of his calculus, to express, in his words, "the
exact nature of a thing briefly and, as it were, picture it." For Leibniz, the
symbol, an accurate and portable picture of an idea, could subsequently reduce
the mental effort required for abstract thought, leading to a "great advantage
for discovery" [@leibniz_briefwechsel_1899, 375; @shneiderman_direct_1983,
57].

Symbolic notation made it possible for mathematicians to represent infinitely
small and infinitely large numbers in print---ideas that would not otherwise
fit on the page or in the mind [@cajori_history_1923; @thurston_leibnizs_1973;
@grabiner_is_1974]. For Shneiderman and others, a computer game like Pong
similarly enabled the direct manipulation of complex abstractions, making it
possible for a player to control a virtual table-tennis paddle by rotating a
physical knob on a gaming console. The movement of the physical knob
corresponded "directly" to the movement of the paddle---clockwise for up and
counter-clockwise for down---thus achieving the correspondence between
"operation" and the "impact on the object of interest"
[@shneiderman_direct_1983, 60]. Without such a "direct" linkage, the physics
of the game simulation would be too complex for players to handle effectively,
were they asked to play by writing formulas in code, for example, or to direct
the paddle through dialog, in conversation.

Direct manipulators argued that the arbitrary nature of the sign to its
signifier hindered the conversational model of human-computer interaction.
When using *EMACS*, for example, a text editor commonly found on UNIX systems
of the time, one would enter the command `k` in combination with other keys to
delete or "kill" a file, while on other systems, Shneiderman complained, `k`
stood for "keep a file," the opposite from killing it
[@shneiderman_direct_1983, 65]. In the conversational model, the command
stands in a contingent relationship to the intended effect, whereas in the
direct manipulation model the knob and the movement of the paddle relate
mimetically. In the language of Peircean semiotics, the direct manipulation
paradigm favors the "iconic" relationship between representation and the
object of interest, by which the two relate through shared elements of
structure and composition [@peirce_algebra_1992; @jakobson_few_1977;
@norman_user_1986, 110]. Consider the game controller for Pong. The movement
of the knob mimics the movement of the paddle it represents. Like an
onomatopoeic word, the one resembles and imitates the other. The central idea
of direct manipulation involved an attempt to move past conversational
contingency. Where there are numerous ways to instruct the machine to return a
serve, the knob limits the player's instrumental vocabulary to two axes.

In their field-defining work on human-computer interaction, Edwin Hutchins,
Donald Norman, and James Hollan wrote:

> There is an economy here [referring to direct manipulation] in that
the user's knowledge of the structure of the surface acoustical form has a
non-arbitrary relationship to meaning [...] The same sort of thing can be done
in the design of interface languages [@norman_cognitive_1991, 123].

Influenced by insights from cognitive metaphor theory about structural domain
mapping, direct manipulators thought the mimetic icon to require less
explanation than an arbitrary symbol. The transference of iconic qualities is
intuited; the icon presents its own explanation.[^ln1-icon] Instead of
searching a "dictionary" of available commands for the right verb the user can
rely on the habituated affordances of real-world objects, like table tennis
paddles and paper trashcans, to manipulate virtual objects, like computer
games and file systems. The move between "conversational" and "direct"
interaction models of human-computer interaction can thus be viewed as a shift
from a system of symbolic signs which stand in arbitrary relationship to their
referents to a system of iconic signs that stand in a mimetic
relationship.[^ln1-peirce]

Crucially, the advocates of direct manipulation aimed to suspend disbelief.
The feeling of directness came through the complete immersion into the mimetic
context of a virtual world [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 76]. In this way,
the mimetic icon usurps the "object of interest" through use. The icon of a
document becomes the writer's object of interest, at the expense of the
inscription itself. Direct manipulation theory imagines the handling of
representations, not objects---as evidenced by the somewhat strained language
of metaphor machines in which "hierarchies allow access to metaphors within
the library" and "users manipulate sheets in the notebook metaphor"
[@pajak_electronic_1992; @glaser_graphical_1995]. It is direct in the sense of
concealing the mediated nature of virtual experience. The goal is to
manufacture what Laurel and others call an "interactive mimesis" and "first
personness," the experience of "directly living and acting within the world
established by the computer" [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986;
@norman_user_1986, 490-1]. Hutchins, Hollan, and Norman write: "when an
interface presents world of action rather than a language of description,
manipulating a representation can have the same effects and the same feel as
manipulating the thing being represented" [@hutchins_direct_1986, 98-99]. The
actual instruments enabling the manipulation of image or word---keyboards,
screens, and machine instructions---are meant to disappear. "The user of a
well-designed *model world* interface can willfully suspend disbelief that the
objects depicted are artifacts of some program and can thereby directly engage
the world of the objects," Norman et.al. write [@hutchins_direct_1986, 99]. In
this view, the dialogic model of tool use encouraged by *Colossal Cave
Adventure*---`get keys`, `get lamp`---stands in the way. Instead of working
with objects of interest, instead of being a part of the story, the
protagonist is "using the computer" [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 74]. "End
users are not interested in *making* representations," Laurel wrote. "They
want to move around *inside* one," favoring the mimetic context over their
actual, physical surroundings [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75]. Verbal
representations, like `get keys` or `get lamp`, puncture the first-person
illusion. By contrast, the fully immersive model supports the "sensation of
directness," in which direct, that is iconic, expressions, "behave in such a
way that a user can assume that they, in some sense, *are* the things they
refer to" [@hutchins_direct_1986, 110].

!["ViewPoint screen image." On screen menus for the Xerox 6085 Daybreak
workstation, 1985 [@johnson_xerox_1989, 13].](images/xerox_star.png)

The principles of direct interaction that emerge in the 1980s stood against
what Laurel called the "ill-formed" presence of the mediator, in the
interfaces of the previous era like JOSS and *Colossal Cave Adventure*. For
those advocating the direct interaction paradigm of computer use,
conversational computing prevented the unmediated "pleasure" and "catharsis"
of direct engagement [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75]. The intermediary
takes the place of the player in a game: it swings the sword for her, takes a
beating, and reports on the experience, standing in the way of immediacy.
Laurel writes:

> In the file management example, the intermediary takes the form of command
menus that are invoked in order to activate processes in the program that will
create the desired results. The user does not have the experience of pushing
files around, stowing them and grabbing them, or blowing them away. Instead,
the user has the experience of communicating with the file management
intermediary [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75].

In combination, the ideas behind cognitive domain blending and direct
manipulation gave rise to the now ubiquitous WYSIWYG (what you see is what you
get) interfaces, put into mass production by Apple, Xerox, and other companies
in the early- to mid-1980s. The Xerox 8010 Star workstation introduced in 1981
and the Xerox 6085 Daybreak workstation, introduced in 1985, heralded the era
of accessible, metaphor-driven personal computing, characterized by the use of
virtual graphical objects like windows, icons, desktops, folders, and buttons.
The Star and Daybreak workstations were some of the earliest machines to put
the principles of metaphoric domain blending and direct manipulation into
action. The interface was meant to "reveal the structure" of the simulated
objects intuitively, without training or lengthy written explanation. In
Laurel's words, the mimetic interface employed "logic and aesthetics to create
representations that *engage* humans in pleasurable ways"
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 85]. The mimetic context is simply "the
experience we desire," Laurel wrote. Direct participation enabled actors to
feel "the full pleasure of the mimetic form" [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986,
75].

Designers advocating direct manipulation understood the compromise that came
with the emphasis on such immersive and pleasurable experiences
[@hutchins_direct_1986, 118]. Effective mimesis relies on the user's
familiarity with the source domain. In this way, we understand what to do with
virtual "folder" icons because we know how paper folders behave in real life.
Direct mimetic manipulation does not however tell us anything new about the
capabilities of virtual folders. Immersion precludes critical reflection
beyond the pre-defined confines of the modeled world. The user has access only
to what the simulated experience allows and can provide. Like a theme park
ride it is a guided experience, which can only lead to predetermined
results.

Problematically, ideas behind mimetic immersion contain a kind of a logical
fallacy. The literature on direct manipulation often refers to the example of
driving a car to illustrate the type of an interface by which inputs and
outputs correlate directly. Thus instead of giving complicated commands to a
vehicle, a driver turns the wheel to the right, and the car immediately
follows. A direct causal link exists between the steering wheel and the car's
axle. Similarly, when operating a computer game like *Space Invaders* via a
joystick, the player experiences the immediate correspondence between the
movement of the controlling mechanism and the movement of the
player-controlled space ship on the screen. The car is the "direct object of
interest" for a driver, just like the virtual space ship is for a gamer.
Unlike video game players, authors attempting to delete sensitive
information---to return to our simple and reoccurring example---are not
interested in the virtual representation of their documents. The object of
their interest is not mimetic. They want to erase the document itself, located
somewhere within the machine. In cases like these, inhabitants of the
simulated, virtual world have an interest in objects outside of it. The
paradigm of direct manipulation instead veils the object from view, suspending
the rules of physical interaction in favor of the virtual. Far from being
direct, the iconic representation of the document---the image of a
file---usurps the physical object, the file itself. Where in the
conversational paradigm the nature of the mediation was at hand, open to
circumspection, "direct manipulation" occludes the mechanisms of mimesis.

The trajectory from direct *physical* manipulation to direct *virtual*
manipulation leads to the totalizing loss of resemblances and designations
that Baudrillard warned of. At its logical extreme, the simulacrum supplants
the thing being simulated. It appears as hyper-reality, the experience of
unmediated interaction without awareness or sense of the underlying referent.
All "objects of interest" within such a model world are fabricated objects.
They are thus limited to the external, artificial constraints imposed by their
makers. Manufactured experiences present us, the "users," with compelling,
possibly cathartic, metaphors. The metaphor extends far beyond entertainment,
subsuming all spheres of social activity mediated by computers. The
manipulation of metaphors---a reflective, not merely circumspect inhabitance
of virtual worlds---therefore requires not just a willing suspension of
disbelief, but also a poetics. The suspension of disbelief otherwise threatens
to become a permanent condition, alienating as it is pleasurable or cathartic.

The history of human-computer interaction began with the manipulation of
physical switches, first by hand and then by proxy, through removable storage
media like paper tape and punch card. The next phase was dialogic and
conversational. Conversational computing introduced the idea of a mediating
agent, an interpreter, who could translate a limited number of natural human
language commands into the specialized vocabulary of signals that changed
machine configuration states. The "direct manipulation" school of
human-computer interaction dispensed with visible machine states, leading us
further towards immersive mimesis in which virtual environments resemble
real-world objects and their properties. Viewing that history in light of
metaphor theory, I find myself suspicious of a totalizing mimesis: the more
compelling the simulation, the more removed from its material contexts, the
more concealed the logistics of its production.

## Speculative Formalism

To what extent do we need to view and understand the mechanisms of the machine
that gives rise to the metaphor? In a paper remarking on "The Genesis and
Speed of Telegraph Codes" published in the *Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society* in 1949, the Frank G. Halstead noted that "the
practical upper limits of [telegraph transmission] speed will also be limited
by the ability of some human beings to operate a keyboard, until such time as
electrical connection be made direct with the receiver's central nervous
system" [@halstead_genesis_1949, 451].

At the time of writing this book, our society stands at the threshold of a new
paradigm of interacting with computers and hence with each other. Direct brain
to computer interfaces are common enough today to be turned into a
toy.[^ln3-mindflex] Early brain-computer interfaces relied on either imprecise
"noisy" electroencephalographic (EEG) scalp sensors or on electrode implants
that required invasive surgery. In 2004 a team of scientists developed a way
of controlling "a one-dimensional computer cursor rapidly and accurately"
using electrocorticographic (ECoG) activity recorded from the surface of the
brain [@leuthardt_braincomputer_2004; @miller_spectral_2007]. And in 2015, a
quadriplegic woman piloted an F-35 Joint Strike Fighter using her brain in a
simulation developed by the University of Pittsburgh's Human Engineering
Research Laboratories in collaboration with the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) [@collinger_collaborative_2014; @prabhakar_how_2015].

On the surface, the advance of brain-computer interfaces seems to bring us
closer to the trajectory of growing immediacy: witness the "no interface"
movement in graphic design and its continuing promise of ever more direct
interaction. *No Interface*, *Don't Make me Think*, and *Hooked: How to Build
Habit-Forming Products* are some of the best selling titles advancing this
argument [@krug_dont_2014; @eyal_hooked:_2014; @krishna_best_2015]. Military
applications aside, we must prepare for a future in affective, mystical arts,
the ultimate loss of references and resemblances, where works of art are to be
experienced emotively past the senses: literature without language or
representation, painting beyond media, asemiosis---messages lacking a sign.

However futuristic such possibilities may seem to us today, we should not lose
sight of the mediated nature of human-computer interaction in all of its
forms: paper, ink, code, silicone. Media intercedes. As technological dreams
become reality they also grow less interesting and more mundane. We tend not
to think about them; they become habit. Habituation smoothes the rough edges
of irreconcilability between human and machine. The tool recedes from view,
beginning to seem a natural and direct extension of the body. I do not mean to
dismiss the mastery of those engaged in creating the illusion of directness.
Pleasure and catharsis are important in some contexts. In other contexts, we
must privilege critical thought, analysis, and interruption. Computational
poetics aims to arrest the encounter: to make it seem less natural, to bring
the receding media to light, and to expose the mediating systems supporting
the simulation.

Heidegger calls such a process the disruption of reference or a *breach*. He
writes:

> When something at hand is missing whose everyday presence was a matter of
course that we never even paid attention to it, this constitutes a *breach* in
the context of references discovered in our circumspection. Circumspection
comes up with emptiness and now sees for the first time what the missing thing
was at hand *for* and at hand *with*. Again the surrounding world makes itself
known [@heidegger_being_1996, 70].

The momentary breach, a measure of discomfort in the fit between bodies,
keyboards, and screens ensures our ability to shape the encounter on our own,
tactical terms: to opt in when useful and to opt out when necessary. I am not
concerned here with the metaphysical entailments of a possible posthuman
future. The illusion of directness belies the very human mechanisms of command
and control. The simulation ultimately embodies specific power structures in
an economy of exchange between physical and mental resources. In this market
there are those who extract rents from virtual, mimetic inhabitance and those
whose dwelling becomes a commodity.

Recall in this regard the Heideggerian insight into the mediated nature of
tool use. In *Being and Time*, Heidegger wrote about the particular
*handiness* of a tool, like a hammer. He writes, "the less we stare at the
thing [...] the more actively we use it, the more original our relation to it
becomes and the more undisguisedly it is encountered as what it is, a useful
thing" [@heidegger_being_1996, 65]. For Heidegger, a tool like a hammer had to
be understood through use. It was inaccessible to reason or theory alone. The
hammer comes into focus through what he called *circumspection*
[*Umsicht*]---the peripheral awareness of the object ready-to-hand
[*zuhanden*] [@heidegger_sein_1967, 69]. One relates to the tool in the
process of manipulating it, while concentrating on the task at hand: the
seamster is not interested in the needle, only in the work of sewing
[@heidegger_being_1996, 65]. Later, Heidegger would connect his account of
tool use with philosophy itself, as a mode of truth seeking or unconcealment
[@heidegger_question_1977, 319]. When used properly, the tool reveals some
truth about the world, about itself, and about the person using it. In this
sense the Greek *techne* is for Heidegger related to *poiesis*, or bringing
forth.

Contrary to the kind of technology that reveals and brings forth, Heidegger
describes also the use of machines and apparatus that conceals and blocks
poiesis. Such tools determine rather than reveal in the sort of a "destined"
revealing that can unfold only along a predetermined narrative, in which the
answer is already given. The forester that walks the woods simply to cut them
down can only reveal its nature as a commodity, in what Heidegger calls a
"standing reserve." The forester who measures the felled timber becomes
subordinate to the organization of cellulose. The wood is challenged forth by
the need of paper, the paper to the press. The press consequently organizes
the public, set on "swallowing what is printed, so that a set configuration of
opinion becomes available on demand." In following the path of a determined
narrative, technology turns the human into human resource. It is in that
sense that Heidegger concludes that modern technology is "no more a human
doing" [@heidegger_question_1977, 323-4]. Ultimately, proscribed tool use
strips users of their powers of self-determination. They learn nothing new
about themselves or the world.

To insist on mediation is to breach the continuity between body and
prosthesis, human and machine, nature and technology. It is to hold the tool
in view, to use in the active voice, to determine its aims, and to destine
rather than to be destined.

I would like to imagine in conclusion the possibility of indexical interfaces,
the kind of signs that connect to their objects of interest through palpable
causal linkages like smoke and fire, tissue damage and pain. Is it possible,
in other words, to inhabit virtual worlds while keeping the scaffolding of the
simulation in view, to connect viscerally to the material conditions of habit
production? The question is of vital political importance, because whether we
have answers or not, implements of symbolic manipulation---books and pens that
once lay safely at an arm's length---move inevitably closer to the mind's eye.
For now, the screen and the hard drive, mechanisms of memory storage and image
projection, remain extrinsic to the body. They are at this moment still
amenable to circumspection. But the gap is closing fast. The political
consequences of our technological choices become more difficult to reveal in
proportion to their habituation. Today, people who forego the use of
electronic tablets, smart phones, laptops, and notebooks could seem merely
whimsical or quaint. What if tomorrow they be judged mentally deficient or
barred from participating fully in the public life?

The human is endangered not by technology, Heidegger wrote, but by its
determination. At stake is an insistence on drawing essential
boundaries in a way that precludes revealment, the autonomous search for truth
[@heidegger_question_1977, 331-4]. The ability to read and to write was always
politically fraught because of its potential to determine the human
experience. It is by no accident that the struggle for universal literacy
accompanied most political revolutions. Poets are important to the revolution
not because they create beautiful aesthetic objects, but because they retain
the non-instrumental, emancipatory potential of reading and writing. What can
be said in parallel about digital literacy, the poetry of embodied and
embedded devices? What if we fail to develop a sense of computational poetics
in the face of frenzied instrumental development of computer technology? How
can one empty the hand, the mind, in breach of technesis? And what will the
emptiness signify: for whom and who with?

<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->

[^ln1-carroll]: @carroll_annotated_1960, 55. See @huxley_raven_1976 and
@susina_why_2001 for a range of possible answers, including Carroll's own:
"Because it can produce a few notes, though they are very flat; and it is
nevar [sic] put with the wrong end in front" [@carroll_alices_1971, xv;
@susina_why_2001, 16-7].

[^ln1-count]: Rick Adams maintains the source code for a number of early
versions of the game at http://rickadams.org/adventure/e_downloads.html.  I
used PDP-10 Fortran version and ran `tr`, `uniq`, and the `wc` Unix utilities
to isolate and count the unique words from the data file.

[^ln1-database]: In describing his Relational Calculus Expression for Metaphor
Generation Lawrence F. Young writes that the "key to this model is the
observation that any entity can be metaphorically associated with another
entity" [@young_metaphor_1987, 312].

[^ln1-dead]: For a book length summary on this topic see
@muller_metaphors_2008.

[^ln1-greek]: In modern Greece metaphor is the ordinary word for
transportation, often inscribed on trucks and shipping containers.

[^ln1-icon]: I am using the traditional Peircian distinction between symbol,
icon, and index. Peirce writes "icons are are so completely substituted for
their objects as hardly to be distinguished from them" [@peirce_algebra_1992,
226].

[^ln1-metalakoff]: [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 245] See also
@turner_conceptual_1995; @ruiz_de_mendoza_ibanez_nature_1998;
@lakoff_invariance_2009.

[^ln3-mindflex]: The American toy giant Mattel makes a game called "Mindflex."
The Frequently Asked Questions page includes the following prompt: "Have you
ever dreamed of moving an object with the power of your mind? Mindflex Duel™
makes that dream a reality! Utilizing advanced Mindflex Duel™ technology, the
wireless headset reads your brainwave activity. Concentrate...and the ball
rises on a cushion of air! Relax...and the ball descends. It's literally mind
over matter!" (@mindflex_mindflex:_2015)

[^ln1-nested]: The notion of "digital text" itself is a metaphor. Files do not
really hold texts. The idea of "text" identifies a segment of stored memory
coupled with control codes that govern layout and projection in specific
material context. Together, these diverse signals and physical affordances
create the illusion of a single text.

[^ln1-peirce]: Charles Sanders Peirce, a philosopher of language whose
vocabulary I have been using here, suggests Simulacra as a possible synonym
for Icon, citing also Plato's *Phaedrus* in relation to the Greek `ὁμοίωμα` or
imitation [@peirce_excerpts_1998, 481; @plato_euthyphro._1999, 250a-b].

[^ln1-rmedium]: For example, see Paul Ricoeur writing on the change in media
from speaking to writing: "The most obvious change from speaking to writing
concerns the relation between message and its medium or channel. At first
glance, it concerns only this relation, but upon closer examination, the first
alteration irradiates in every direction, affecting in a decisive manner all
the factors and functions" [@ricoeur_interpretation_1976, 26].

\newpage
