# Chapter 2: Metaphor Machines

Jean Baudrillard's sometimes enigmatic comments on the "genesis of simulacra"
in the late eighties are beginning to come into focus for me only now, at a
time when code has already conquered culture. Today, computers interject
ubiquitously. We drink our morning coffee from brewing machines that use
"fuzzy logic." At night, we go to bed surrounded by smart alarm clocks and
sleep activity monitors. "At the limit of an always increasing elimination of
references and finalities," Baudrillard wrote, "we find 'the programmatic
sign', whose 'value' is purely tactical." Like good theater, we experience the
machine in immersion, suspending disbelief. This leads to what Baudrillard has
called the "ever-increasing loss of resemblances and designations."
[@baudrillard_symbolic_1988, 139-140] The programmatic sign circumvents
critical reflection in favor of affect. Its value is tactical in the sense
that it appeals to instrumental terms like efficiency, performance,
disruption, and innovation.

Code, as we will encounter it here, elicits pleasure and catharsis. In this,
the programmer and the "user" occupy distinct and unequal positions in the
epistemological hierarchy. Code is not usually meant to be decoded by those it
acts upon. They are spared the "friction" of signification, remaining instead
in the state of asemiosis. In return for such felicity code compels exacting
obedience. Baudrillard thus speaks of the "micromolecular structure of command
and control," as the essence of the programmatic sign
[@baudrillard_symbolic_1988, 139-140]. The appeal to structure at the
molecular level draws our attention to the perils of selective illiteracy. As
inscription, code flows at a layer not immediately perceptible to human
senses. The "users" are thereby confronted with the choice to persist in the
simulation pleasurably or face the difficulty of microscopic reading, which
requires special tools and training. Value is further derived from the
resulting imbalance of critical acumen.

The programmatic sign so conceived splits its energies between screen and hard
drive. On screen, at the site of projection, the programmatic sign simulates
familiar materialities: buttons, bins, files, folders, drawers, desktops,
windows, tiles, wood grain, drop shadows, chrome. At the site of storage, from
which the sign emanates, the language changes to the vocabulary of control:
central processing units, compilation, commitment, extraction, command,
condition, initiation, handling, function, persistence, and execution. In the
rift between the sites of storage---what is---and projection---what appears to
be---the programmatic sign undergoes a series of structural transformations.
What originates from (a) the keyboard as the mechanical action of a switch
becomes (b) an electric signal that (c) leaves magnetic marks in computer
memory, which (d) morph into phases of liquid crystal on screen, leaving
behind (e) letters that emanate outward as light. Programming languages bridge
the passage between bodies, archives, and screens, breaking thought up into
differentiated units for transfer.  Simulation emerges in the reassembly of
such units back into a continuous integrated whole. Texts dissolve into
letters and pixels which then congeal back into holistic literary works.

Roman Jakobson called such construction and deconstruction of meaning the
"profuse exchange of ritualized formulas" or the phatic function of language
[@malinowski_problem_1923, 146; @jakobson_linguistics_1960, 355]. Code, like
the phatic utterance, contains all the stuff that is extra to the content. It
describes the channel of communication: its conditions and rules for
engagement. The words "Hello world" on paper or in plain text format take up
11 bytes. In the Portable Document Format (PDF) they comprise more that 24,000
bytes. The added information contains the kind of profuse exchange of
ritualized formulas that Jakobson describes. Only in this case, the phatic
function is hidden from view. It is more profuse than in speech---Can you hear
me now?---but less visible.

Programming at its essence is a phatic activity. Code shapes and commands. At
the same time, it conjures fantastical metaphors to occlude the structure of
shaping and commanding. The simulacrum created by code obscures the
incongruence between visible signs and a medium's underlying material
affordances. What you see is not always what you get. We are instead
confronted with a composite image, which under examination reveals a complex
process of transfiguration between the visible sign and sign at the site of
inscription.

The simulation is without a referent. It bears little resemblance to material
substrata of electronic reading. We believe we are handling books; our ideas
about reading and interpretation subsequently rely on that initial physical
point of contact with paper. But when reading electronically, we are handling
something other than print material. The semblance to paper guides our
intuitions about the medium and its associated affordances: to scroll,
bookmark, or turn pages. We have far fewer intuitions about the affordances of
inscription, at the micromolecular level. As we "turn" simulated pages,
electric charges embedded into a solid state medium cross the impenetrable
oxide barrier, reaching their destination, the floating gate, through quantum
tunnelling. Electromagnetic inscription exploits the wave-particle duality of
matter and its corollary the Heisenberg uncertainty principle
[@pavan_flash_1997; @aaron_flash_2002; @bez_introduction_2003]. A digital text
thus comprises numerous improbable events at quantum scale.

What can be said then about practices of reading and interpretation grounded
in such remote physicalities? For now, only that they continue to unfold
figuratively, removed from the material conditions of knowledge production.
Metaphor sustains our lives in digital worlds artificially, by analogy with
habituated media. We already know what to do with paper; electronic books
therefore replicate paper. Replicators dull the discomfort of contact between
human and machine. They hinder efforts to master poetics at quantum scale: the
ability to inject electrons, draw lattices, manipulate arrays, affect solid
states of being. It is tempting to view media ecosystems that host our digital
lives as a kind of a natural element like water or air. But we should not
forget that computational ecologies are always constructed environments. They
are not governed by laws of physics in the same sense that clouds or oceans
are.  They form part of a massive tactical effort to bring private spaces of
inhabitance---think the *Home* folder on your computer, your family photo
album, your digital bookmarks---under the purview of computational control.
Simulations encode political structures that should not be naturalized, lest
we succumb to the complacency of technological determinism.

My goal in this chapter is therefore to interrupt the frictionless advance of
the computational metaphor: to separate resemblances from their designations,
the apparent shape from a command in the imperative. What does it mean to turn
a page in a medium that sustains neither turning nor pages? I will rely on the
language of cognitive metaphor theory to tell a story of metaphor's influence
on computation, at a formative moment in the history of human-computer
interaction. I approach this tradition from within, taking on its language and
assumptions in the first few sections of the chapter. The latter sections
narrate the historical transition between literal computing, by which users
gave explicit commands to their machines, and the so-called "direct
manipulation" model, in which they began to occupy virtual, figurative
environments. The chapter draws on archives from graphic design, literary
theory, and computer science---fields that come into direct contact in the
1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. The trajectory from the conversational to "direct"
model of human-computer interaction points to a speculative possibility, by
which human and machine couple in seemingly unmediated, affective ways. I
acknowledge and finally reject the idea outright in my conclusion.

## Verisimilitude

Metaphors structure human habitation within simulated environments. "People do
not think like computers," a group of engineers from Interval Research Group
wrote in a patent application describing "methods and systems for providing
human/computer interfaces." Metaphors, according to their description, "permit
more efficient and medium independent communications between people and
computers."[@boyden_methods_1999, 1] Metaphor mediates in the symbolic
transference between human and machine, at the liminal space where two
disparate systems of representation meet to exchange information. "Certain
encoded information is translated into certain decoded information," the
engineers concluded [@boyden_methods_1999].

Interfaces translate machine states---the configuration of open and closed
circuits---into pictures, numbers, and letters---all species of human
cognitive states. A computer is, in essence, a system for such metaphoric
transference of properties. "A user interface is represented on the display
screen in the form of metaphoric objects, called icons" wrote another group of
engineers, in employ by the Xerox Corporation. An icon, they continued, "may
be a representation of a virtual object, such as a virtual floppy disk."
Crucially, a virtual object may be accessible either in what the authors
referred to as a "host system world" or an "emulating processor world," even
when "virtual floppy disk[s] may have a filing system alien to the host system
world." [@beard_data_1990, 1] An arrangement of information on screen---the
poetics of emulated space---are incompatible with arrangements of
electromagnetic charge on disk---poetics of inscription.

To reflect on metaphoric function in everyday computation, consider the
following passage from a patent filed by Xerox in 1991. It describes an
"electronic library metaphor," which includes:

> a shared books with data base metaphor, a reference books metaphor, and a
> card catalog metaphor in one system that allows large object oriented data
> bases to be organized and accessed in an exclusive environment and in
> addition allows access to screen icons, creates a visual hierarchy of
> related and shared objects, and allows mutually exclusive access to the
> metaphors within the library [@pajak_electronic_1992, 1].

The invention ultimately enables the "organizing, accessing, and querying of
information unique to physical libraries in an electronic workstation
environment" [@pajak_electronic_1992, 1]. Set aside, for a moment, the
peculiarity of being able to patent a metaphor and instead note the
idiosyncrasy of the technical language. How does one "access" a metaphor, for
example?  Were someone to "check out" a book from the electronic library,
would they hold onto a book or its metaphor alone? What mechanisms would
assure the integrity between a database and its metaphor? Is the visual
hierarchy of related objects itself an object in that hierarchy? Traditional
metaphor theory strains to answer such questions.

Traditional metaphor theorists saw metaphor as a linguistic phenomenon. To say
"the day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops" is to use the verb "stand"
in a novel linguistic context. Days have no literal legs to stand on. But in
the 1980's, scholars including John Searle, George Lakoff, Mark Turner argued
that metaphors were broadly cognitive phenomena, which map distinct
ontological categories across "conceptual domains" [@lakoff_metaphors_1980;
@turner_death_1987; @lakoff_contemporary_1998, @searle_metaphor_1998]. In the
modified view, even such basic semantic concepts as "quantity, state, change,
action, cause, purpose, means, modality" were metaphorical in nature
[@lakoff_metaphorical_1980; @lakoff_contemporary_1998, 212]. Lakoff and others
further argued that beyond figurative, lyrical language, metaphors also
structure everyday experience.[^ln1-analogy] Thus the analysis of common
phrases like "things are looking up" and "I can't get that tune out of my
mind" reveals the underlying figuration like "good things are up" and "the
mind is a container." The idea that "good things are up" generates a number of
further metaphors like "profits are going up" and "moving on up"
[@lakoff_metaphorical_1980, 195-198]. "The mind is a container" produces "open
your mind" and "close-minded."

!["An exemplary interface for viewing a three dimensional book."
[@card_methods_2006, 3]](images/figure-2-1.png)

!["Alternate display techniques for information about a big book."
[@card_methods_2006,4]](images/figure-2-2.png)

In the cognitive view, metaphors perform a number of "conventional mappings
from one domain to another" [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 239]. Lakoff mentions
for example the common trope of "a state is a person," implicit in the ideas
of "friendly" and "hostile" states [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 243]. These
imply that ideas---about agency, emotion, and mental life---usually attached
to people, can also extend to state actors. Similarly, to say that someone is
"boiling mad," instantiates the common trope of "anger is a hot liquid in a
container." In the latter case, familiar properties associated with physics
transfer to emotion. Lakoff explains that such domain mappings tend to also
follow a few rules. "Mappings are not arbitrary," he writes, "but grounded in
the body and in everyday experience and knowledge." Finally domain mappings
obey what Lakoff calls the Invariance Principle, by which "the image schema
structure of the source domain is projected onto the target domain in a way
that is consistent with inherent target domain structure."[^ln1-metalakoff]
Keep these rules in mind as they will become important later on in our
conversation.

The kind of resemblances that we have been discussing so far---between
documents and their icons, for example---are further referred to as
*structural metaphors*. Structural metaphors do more than orient concepts,
Lakoff and Johnson wrote in the 1980s. Grounded in "systematic correlations
within our experience," structural metaphors transfer organizing principles
from one domain to another [@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 61-8]. Thus to say "the
world is our oyster" is to suggest that something in our approach to
interacting with oysters resembles our approach to life. The ease of eating
one, for example, transfers to the ease of living in the other. The
transferred property implies more than a semantic similarity, one of meaning,
but also a structural one, one of interface. The metaphor suggests an
arrangement which like an oyster can be cracked or that it may contain a tasty
hidden morsel within. Structural metaphors so organize one thing in shape of
another. They are tools for extending insight from known domains to lesser
known ones. They hold great explanatory and exploratory power by which simple
things like oysters shed light on complex things like worlds.

In their capacity for explanation and exploration, metaphor machines present
us with a special case of conceptual domain blending. They enact, rather than
merely suggest, a transference of structuring principles from one system to
another: from "physical libraries" to "electronic workstations environments,"
in the above example. Metaphors that can be touched and handled in some way
exist neither wholly in language nor wholly in mind. Rather, they are at hand,
in action. John Carrol, one of the pioneers in the field of human-computer
interaction, summarized the role of metaphors in the design of computing
systems as follows:

> Professional programmers might learn a new system X by metaphorizing at least
initially from what they already know about system Y. More casual or naive
end-users might rely on metaphors drawn from more distant knowledge domains,
e.g. on what they have already learned about electric typewriters [...] The
implications of this proposal are simple and direct. If people employ metaphors
in learning about computing systems, the designers of those systems should
anticipate and support likely metaphorical constructions to increase the ease
of learning and using the system [@carroll_metaphor_1982, 107-108].

In essence, Carroll imagines human-computer interfaces that incorporate
Lakoff's and Johnson's "conceptual blending" in practice. The simulacrum of a
familiar gesture of discarding a crumpled piece of paper can thus guide the
deletion of electronic documents.

Apple's influential *Human Interface Guidelines*, at the core of Apple's
desktop interfaces in the 1980s and today, echoes Carroll's proscriptions:

> You can take advantage of people's knowledge of the world around them by
using metaphors to convey concepts and features of your application. Use
metaphors involving concrete, familiar ideas and make the metaphors plain, so
that users have a set of expectations to apply to computer environments.  For
example, people often use file folders to store paper documents in their
offices. Therefore, it makes sense to people to store computer documents in
computer-generated folders that look like file folders. People can organize
their hard disks in a way that's analogous to the way they organize their file
cabinets [@apple_apple_1987, 4].

Apple's designers understood that the mapping of concepts between the physical
and the computer-generated worlds is imperfect. For example, unlike a
real-world file folder, constrained by the size of its containing cabinet, a
computer folder can hold a nearly unlimited amount of files. To be more
precise, the electronic folder metaphor is subject to different constraints
than those that limit the use of paper files. Images of paper files should not
therefore restrict the possibilities of digital files, the manual explains.
Designers are to "strike a balance between the metaphor's suggested use and
the ability of the computer to support and extend the metaphor"
[@apple_apple_1987, 5]. Users handling virtual folders must recognize their
capabilities beyond those suggested by iconography. Some attributes of the
paper domain map onto the virtual, while other do not. Virtual objects further
contain possibilities not conveyed by analogy.

A number of patents from IBM, Xerox, and Microsoft evoke the logics of
structural metaphor and domain blending. Consider US Patent #5,907,854 by
Paula J. Cox et.al. of International Business Machines. The invention
describes "a library metaphor that allows a user to organize the online books
in a manner that has meaning and utility." Its authors continue to explain
that while "the actual books may be stored in many separate and distinct
locations [...] the bookcase provides a familiar classification system." The
creation of bookcase metaphors must also involve "the creation of appropriate
links to the actual online book/bookshelf/bookcase." Book metaphors ultimately
provide "an easy to understand and intuitive model for a user who might not be
familiar with on-line viewing tools" [@cox_method_1999].

Another metaphor machine can be found in the collaboration between the
influential product design firm IDEO and Xerox in the 1990s. The two worked on
an early file manager shell called PC Catalog, later renamed TabWorks. In
describing the design process, IDEO developers wrote about defining "key
elements of the metaphor" contained in the image of "tabs" and "catalogs."
"The book *cover*," they wrote, "opened to display three *rings* binding a set
of divider *tabs*, each containing one or more *pages*." Pages, in turn
contained *items* or "icons representing documents or applications"
[@moll-carrillo_articulating_1995, 572]. In a similar binder-based software
application, IBM engineers describe "contents of the notebook metaphor," which
are "displayed as a stack of sheets." "The interface [...] permits a user to
directly manipulate the sheets in the notebook metaphor"
[@glaser_graphical_1995].

Note, however, the awkward slide from objects to their representation. "Users
manipulate metaphors directly" is a somewhat nonsensical proposition.
Metaphors mediate. They are exactly what makes the interaction indirect. The
idea of "direct manipulation" seems to refer to an object's immediate
availability to hand. Users *do not* handle objects immediately, however. They
take hold of images. Actual data objects are occluded in favor of their
mimetic representation. Paper and page metaphors substitute for the reality of
floating gates and electromagnetic charges. The program should have been
called metaphoric manipulation.

Figurative formation is crucial to our contemporary political predicament, by
which structures of digital control do not correspond to their purported
image. In the following sections, I would like to examine this subtle sleight
of hand---the misleading promise implicit in modern user interface
design---more closely and on its own terms.

## Death and Incongruence

In poetics, metaphors are said to be "motivated" when a number of concepts
from one domain extends into another to produce insight
[@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 210-1]. Lakoff explains that to say "to spin one's
wheels" when referring to someone who is thinking is to apply the reader's
knowledge of automobiles to the mental realm. Wheels that spin without moving
the vehicle forward waste energy. The metaphor suggests that something similar
happens mentally as well [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 211].

In his influential essay on metaphor the English literary critic I.A. Richards
wrote that "when we use metaphor we have two thoughts of different things
active together and supported by a single word, or phrase, whose meaning is a
resultant of their interaction" [@richards_philosophy_1936, 95]. Richards's
radical contribution to metaphor theory lay in the observation that metaphors
operate in language, thought, and action ubiquitously. They do not, as
previously thought, exist merely in the realm of poetic language. Thought in
itself, Richards believed, is metaphoric in that the mind continually searches
for patterns and comparisons [@richards_philosophy_1936, 94]. Motivated
metaphors produce insight: we use them to explore and make sense of our world.

Some metaphors are, however, more productive than others. The poetic use of
metaphor does not merely carry meaning across known domains---it produces new
and unexpected connections between them. To this effect, Richards cites Percy
Shelley who wrote the following in defense of poetry:

> [poetic] language is vitally metaphorical; that is, it marks the before
> unapprehended relations of things and perpetuates their apprehension, until
> the words which represent them, become, through time, signs for portions or
> classes of thoughts instead of pictures of integral thoughts; and then if no
> new poets should arise to create afresh the associations which have been
> thus disorganized, language will be dead to all the nobler purposes of human
> intercourse [@shelley_essays_1840].

In highlighting the continually regenerative power of poetic metaphor, Shelley
anticipated what the cognitive school of metaphor theory was to confirm by
empirical means more than a century later [@mojtabai_delusion_2000;
@billig_metaphor_2005]. Metaphors do not "die" as such. They continue to live,
but also become naturalized: that is, understood literally. They create
connections, which with time become habituated and invisible. Taken for
literal truth, metaphors lose their quality of mediation or literally
"ferrying across."[^ln1-greek] The idea of "dead metaphors" itself no longer
evokes death, for example.[^ln1-dead] Metaphors wither: once a connotation is
lost, it becomes a denotative statement lacking any exploratory or explanatory
potential. In Shelley's view, all metaphors are destined to become habituated
in this way, only to be reborn again in poetry.

In the height of their generative powers, metaphors produce new meaning. At
the nadir, they block judgement and perception. Creative juxtaposition between
two as before unrelated conceptual domains brings novel aspects of experience
to light. With time, however, metaphors no longer perpetuate understanding;
they become commonplace instrumental shortcuts. In the words of Viktor
Shklovsky: we "cease to experience" the trope [@shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914].
Vilém Flusser put it another way in writing that habituated idiom proceeds
"smoothly," giving us no pause, without "bumps or interruptions"
[@flusser_freedom_2003, 13 and 82].

Lakoff famously took exception to the idea of dead metaphors, arguing that
even those metaphors that are thoroughly habituated can play a vital part in
structuring everyday experience. He gave an example of the following sentence:
*He still can't quite grasp the basic ideas of quantum mechanics*.  Grasping,
in this case, is used as a synonym to "understanding." It indicates a
transference of properties between physical (grasping) and mental
(understanding) realms. Despite being commonplace, the metaphor is alive,
Lakoff argued, because it continues to perform a function, naming a mental
activity that we would otherwise find difficult to explain with precision.
Such metaphors are less dead than other, perhaps more novel, "one off" poetic
tropes that fail to circulate widely [@lakoff_death_1987]. A metaphor dies in
the sense of being overused, but it dies also in another sense for not being
used at all.

Truly dead metaphors for Lakoff are ones where the original source image no
longer makes sense. He gives the example of the English *pedigree*, which
originally referred to the French for "crane's foot," or *pied de grue*. The
foot was historically used in a typographical flourish to decorate familial
tree diagrams.

In the previous example, when we spoke of metaphorical mental "grasping," both
sides of the domain transference were readily available to us. We understood
something about grasping things and extended it to the mind's capacity to take
hold of ideas. By contrast, most English speakers no longer perceive the *pied
de grue* contained within *pedigree*.  In the case of a commonplace, the
metaphor is merely tired from frequent use, whereas it is completely dead in
the crane's foot example. All habituated metaphors like "grasping ideas" and
"pedigree" lose a measure of their symbolic connotation with time. Unlike
"pedigree," however, the metaphorical nature of "grasping ideas" is at least
available for casual interpretation. It therefore retains its generative
powers. According to Lakoff, the underlying metaphor "the mind is like a hand"
produces other meaningful phrases like "you have to *let go* of this idea."
The crane's foot in the English "pedigree" by contrast has stopped generating
novel connections. The conventional notion of dead metaphors, Lakoff objects,
does not appropriately differentiate between the two cases of metaphor
dysfunction [@lakoff_death_1987; @muller_metaphors_2008]. Metaphors sometimes
"die" but continue to produce new linkages, as is the case with grasping
ideas. At other times, they die in the sense of one domain becoming no longer
accessible to its user, as is the case with pedigree.

Furthermore, note that wholly unmotivated metaphors do not live at all. Thus
the Mad Hatter poses his famous nonsensical riddle in Lewis Carroll's *Alice
in Wonderland*: How is a raven like a writing desk? The complete dissimilarity
between the domains---of animals and furniture---prevents any productive
congruence.[^ln1-carroll] No domain mapping happens between ravens and writing
desks. Not having been born, the metaphor dies in yet another sense.

With these comments on broken and dead metaphors in mind, I return to computer
screens and ask: How do interface metaphors live or die by the above
definitions?

When we discard a document into a dustbin, to return to our recurring example,
we intuitively expect the computer to erase it. This would fulfill Lakoff's
invariance principle, which, if you would recall, describes transference from
a source domain *in a way that is consistent with the inherent structure of
the target domain* [@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 215]. But the computer does not
do this. We "empty the dustbin," but have no means to verify the structure of
the implied transference. Our ability to actually erase data stands in an
arbitrary relationship to the depicted figure. The metaphor breaks almost as
badly as transference between desks and ravens. Indeed, the act of "emptying
trashcans" ceases to be metaphoric. It no longer stands for the action it
depicts. The transferred properties are not simply missing in transit, they
are manifestly misrepresented.

## Dissimulation

Readers know how paragraphs, pages, files, and folders relate to paper and
would like for their digital images to behave in a similar way. The principles
of metaphor-driven design contain an implicit model of human-computer
interaction, which suggests that humans prefer to manipulate digital
information stored on computational media by the means of familiar mediating
structures---paragraphs, pages, files, and folders---associated figuratively
with the affordances of print media. For example, one affordance of paper is
that it can be folded. It therefore becomes possible to "earmark" a page by
folding a corner. Patently, digital media cannot (as of yet) fold by the way
of paper. Readers seeking a mechanism for digital recollection may not be
familiar with the affordances of the newly inhabited medium. Consequently, the
affordances of digital media are presented through metaphor. In this way, a
virtual "earmark" on a "page" represents a numerical pointer to a specific
address in the computer memory. A "page" stands for a range of related
addresses that correspond roughly to the information visible on an analogous
page in print. Similarly, one "drops a folder into a trash bin" or "drags and
drops a file" or "bookmarks a page" on a screen. Such metaphors rely on
habituated insight with one medium extended into another. We do not literally
"drag" or "drop" bits, but we use metaphors of paper and trashcans to help us
manipulate bits and bytes as if they were household objects. The metaphor
opens figurative possibilities. It also obscures actual physical contingencies
of interacting with bits and bytes, logic gates and electromagnetic traces.

Metaphorical substitution encourages readers to extend their facility with one
sort of media (paper and ink) to another (screen and pixels). But, what
readers gain in facility, they lose in critical faculty. Alienated from the
material conditions of information storage and retrieval, readers gain access
to the metaphor alone. Thus we go through the motions of "turning the page"
but in actuality redraw the screen. We "highlight a passage," which
constitutes an action that may also send information about the highlighted
passage to a data aggregation service. We "share a book" which really means
assigning a temporary license to another user. Where does the text go? I ask
when downloading a paper from an online journal.[^ln1-nested] It is in your
home folder, someone answers. But unless one of us is familiar with the
material contingencies of file storage, neither has a mental map of any
physical location corresponding to the "home" folder, the default location of
personal files on many systems. When confronted with the actual affordances of
digital text, users grasp for neutered metaphors. We "reside" in such "homes,"
"own," "share," and "create" only in the simulacrum.

Interface metaphors conceal structures of algorithmic governance and control
over the transmission of symbolic goods. Print offers a relatively static and
stable medium by comparison. Ink and paper do not change much in transit. By
contrast, the vessels of computation are capable of altering their contents
dynamically. Imagine my asking you to read Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, for
example, in sharing a copy of the text. I am fairly certain that the text will
remain unaltered as I pass the book into your hands. By contrast, the computed
sign adjusts itself to new contexts. An electronic version of *Hamlet* could
change based on the new reader's geographic location, mood, or consumption
habits. In fact, most texts we consume today come to us in such a
computationally constructed way. The front page of the *New York Times* viewed
in Beijing will differ from that viewed in New York. The two "pages" or
"sites" are in some sense two completely different textual variants. In
another sense, the "front page" identifies the same location of the same text,
in two diverging and dynamically composed versions. Whatever is meant by
"today's edition of the *New York Times*" in that sense, denotes differing
surface phenomena that emanate from the same source.

The key to understanding the "loss of resemblances" that accompanies
ubiquitous simulation lies in the inner dynamics of the metaphor machinery. A
functioning metaphor, if you would recall from Lakoff, is one which transfers
structural properties of one domain into another. Thus to say "life is a
stage" is to transpose something about theater onto life. In literary terms,
theater is "tenor" where "life" is "vehicle" of the composite figure
[@richards_philosophy_1936, 96-7]. Simulations work differently. Where the
tenor of the literary metaphor *transfers* properties across domains, the
computational metaphor *substitutes* them, confusing "signs of the real for
the real" [@baudrillard_simulacra_1994, 2]. It is a subtle difference that
engenders not-so-subtle effects. For example, it would be one thing to say
"you are the apple of my eye" and quite another to confuse apples for eye
pupils. Baudrillard gives us the example of a map that no longer corresponds
to any territory. He calls such a condition of pure simulation without a
referent hyperreality.

Hyperreality emanates from the momentum of the expected correspondence between
representation and the thing being represented. For example, one expects a
weather simulation to model actual observed meteorological conditions. Would
it still be a weather simulation if the model was broken in some way, or, in
the extreme, if it had no correspondence to the physics of clouds, wind, and
water whatsoever? The hyperreal model breaks further still by usurping,
instead of imitating or merely obscuring, the underlying reality. It begins to
simulate itself, according to its own rules, entering a state of
dissimulation. Such dissimulation no longer corresponds to any conditions "on
the ground." Severed from their referent, signs attain the status of things
represented: a map of a map, a symbol that folds onto itself, weather
simulation confused for weather.

We know that physical affordances of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and
electromagnetic storage differ drastically from those of paper, goat skins, or
parchment. For example, an English-language character occupies eight basic
units of information (bits) on a disk where a print character occupies one
basic unit (letter). A disk can tolerate millions of rewrites, where paper
medium wears out after only a few. Paper inscriptions are visible to the naked
eye where digital inscriptions are not. Still, simulations maintain an
illusion of similarity. We encounter what is called *skeuomorphic* design, by
which screen reading retains the ornaments of print. In this way, electronic
book readers mimic the bent corner of a well-thumbed book. Skeuomorphic
metaphors extend visual cues from one medium to another. A reader already
knows how to turn book pages. Book devices therefore simulate page turning to
ease the cognitive burden of transitioning from paper to pixel. Instead of
issuing arcane commands meant for the machine, readers perform the more
habituated motion of swiping across the screen. The gliding motion enacts a
kinetic analogy---a type of a metaphor---as if to transpose properties of
paper to glass.

The more convincing its simulacrum, the more our grasp on the medium weakens.
By definition, simulation "assumes a form resembling that of something else,"
whereby one referent is exchanged for another [@_simulation_2015]. To drag and
drop a document into a trashcan on screen, for example, should in theory
correspond to an analogous set of data manipulations on disk. Yet, "discarding
a file" in this manner does not necessarily include deletion of data from
storage medium, as expected. The document icon disappears visually where its
electromagnetic trace endures. Such "loss of resemblances" could in theory
remain insignificant. Does one care whether a file was actually erased or not
when performing deletion? Perhaps not. But in some cases, when it really
matters---under the threat of censorship or prosecution, for example---the
incongruence exposes the frailty of our alienation from the material contexts
of digital labor. Under duress, one may demand the thing to stay deeply
deleted. The problem of metaphoric immediacy reappears in the unfulfilled
promise of mimesis. In many contexts, the metaphoric vehicle claims to bridge
domains and to ferry content across faithfully, without meddling or damaging
its contents. But if metaphors do meddle---if they mediate while dissembling
and dissimulating---by what process can one ensure the efficacy of
transference? What entity makes good on the promise of verisimilitude?

Readers ultimately bear the burden of verification. In pretending to turn
virtual pages uncritically, we lose sight of the metaphor. If we hope to
practice anything like interpretation or close reading at the level of digital
discourse, we must certainly do so at the site of its formation. A truly
materialist poetics would reach down from representation to its medium. More
than superficial embellishment, skeuomorphic metaphors enacted at the digital
surface structure all higher-order meaning-carrying units: from individual
letters to words, paragraphs, chapters, pages, and books.

Why would readers engage in such a charade? Why not simply make use of novel
interfaces afforded by new technology? The literature in human-computer
interaction suggests a formalist answer: habituation [See
@carroll_metaphor_1982; @carroll_interface_1987; @spolsky_user_2001]. The
initial effort it takes to learn to read in a new environment discourages
potential readers from adopting new technologies. Smart designers therefore
rely on acculturated practice, the turning of pages in our case, to minimize
adaptive "friction." Digital poems, novels, physician's scripts, and legal
contracts resemble their paper counterparts in order to enable familiar
actions. But while imitating paper pages, reading appliances also monitor,
adjust, warn, and control.

Dissimulation conceals structuring principles large and small. Some occluded
details remain inconsequential, like the limit on how many keys can be pressed
at once without overwhelming keyboard circuitry when typing. Other concealed
details are of paramount importance. Digital rights management chips and
censorship filters interfere directly and in ways that are often purposefully
hidden from the reader. US Digital Millennium Copyright Act for example
prohibits physical circumvention of copyright protections [See
@ku_critique_2004; @ginsburg_legal_2005; @perzanowski_rethinking_2008;
@fry_circumventing_2009; @von_lohmann_unintended_2010]. An electronic book
encrypted to prevent copyright infringement could also prevent readers from
examining codes and codices embedded into the device---rules governing
accessibility, preservation, or freedom of speech. Material affordances of
inscription at that deep, bottom-most meaning-bearing medium influence all
higher-level practices of interpretation.[^ln1-rmedium]

Traditional theories of textual interpretation rely on properties and
assumptions attached to print media. For example, Hans-Georg Gadamer famously
imagined the artistic transformation of abstract "free play" into concrete
material structure [*Gebilde*] that is both "repeatable" and "permanent"
[@gadamer_truth_1975, 110]. Similarly, in his *Interpretation Theory*, Paul
Ricoeur wrote about the "range of social and political changes" related to the
invention of writing. To the stability of communication in print Ricoeur
attributes the "birth of political rule exercised by a distant state" and "the
birth of market relationships." The constitution of archives enables history;
the fixity of law, justice. "Such an immense range of effects suggests that
human discourse is not merely preserved from destruction," Ricoeur wrote. It
is also "deeply affected in its communicative function"
[@ricoeur_interpretation_1976, 26-8]. Digital text offers no such permanence.
What is meant by "fixed" "durable," and "repeatable" changes with the device.
Such properties come to us under the guise of surface representation. Nothing
is guaranteed in the passage of digital text from one pair of hands into
another. Formatting expands its purview beyond typographical convention.  It
includes the capability to substitute words, summarize automatically, generate
discourse by algorithmic means, or erase wholesale. What does it mean then to
read and interpret texts which change depending on their contexts? How can
literary analysis---close reading, philology, hermeneutics---persist without
the fixity of print?

![Formal structures at the site of the inscription. "Perspective view of a
portion of a charge translating device illustrating a preferred electrical
contact arrangement. A quantum of charge carriers, representing an information
bit [...] can be translated along the semiconductor [...] sweeping the
minority carriers with it. The quantum can be detected by a simple capacitive
couple, e.g., a floating gate." [@boyle_information_1974, sheet
7].](images/figure-2-3.png)

Dissimulation is perhaps necessary, because the reading and writing of digital
data can involve processes far outside of everyday experience. For example, in
reading data from solid state (FLASH) memory, a circuit imparts electrical
charge through quantum tunneling onto a connected series of floating gate
transistors (Fig 2.3) [See @pavan_flash_1997; @bez_introduction_2003].
Whatever the complexities of solid state storage architecture, the difference
in the structure of information on pages and floating gates is apparent. The
arrangement of one has only an arbitrary connection to the other.
Consequently, changes in the structure of the symbolic domain, which manifest
in the erasure of words on screen for example, do not necessitate
corresponding changes in the physical domain, which in the same example
manifest in the discharge of the floating gate. Information endures despite
intended erasure.

Dwellers of virtual realms believe in verisimilitude as a matter of faith. We
hope for the analogy of turning pages or erasing words on screen to entail
similar actions on disk. But we waver when asked to authenticate the
particulars of the simulation. At times, "erased" data is simply hidden from
view. At other times, instead of disappearing it proliferates across deep
surfaces, shared without consent with agents not privy to the original
contexts of inscription. As was the case with Baudrillard's map, metaphors of
reading and writing digitally break in that they no longer resemble any
familiar terrain. Dissimulation mimics known materialities absent their actual
physics. It suggests a structuring of one kind, while enacting another.

Micromolecular writing, of the kind perceived already by Kittler and
Baudrillard in the 1990s, today demands the corresponding practice of
microscopic reading [@kittler_there_1995]. I imagine here the inverse of
Kittler's literature without humans: cryptic, illegible, and under the
conditions of high technology. The methodology of computational poetics
insists on recovering the full inscription, across surfaces and domains. It
makes the extent of the dissimulating figure available for interpretation.

What happens in the metaphorical transfer between cognitive
structures---contracts, poems, novels---and device-things that simulate
them---screens, drives, readers? Estrangement, the exegesis of metaphor,
reveals the rules of transference from one medium to another. A materialist
poetics can subsequently allow one to consent, or, conversely, resist elements
of imposed structure. That is not to say that meaning-making structures can
ever become fully transparent or produce plain, unambiguous meaning. A cypher
precludes not the ambiguity, but the very possibility of interpretation and
misinterpretation. It physically prevents access. In the continuum between
total legibility and illegibility, digital text today occupies the space
somewhere right of center. It is illegible in part and by dispensation.
Archivists know this problem well: the simulation of print decays rapidly.
Digital documents---computer games and proprietary text formats---become
inaccessible as platforms used to decode them themselves pass into oblivion.

## Mimesis

"An interface is by nature a form of artistic imitation: a *mimesis*," Brenda
Laurel wrote in her important 1984 essay "Interface as Mimesis." She went on
to argue that "if designing interfaces feels like painting on cave walls by
flickering torchlight, it is only because we, the designers, have not availed
ourselves of better illumination: the science of the mimetic arts, poetics"
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 67]. Laurel, who started her academic career
in theater studies, went on to work for Apple, Activision, Atari, and Sun
Microsystems among other companies. Her work, widely cited in technical
literature, reminds us of the close connection between poetics and the
architecture of human-computer interaction.

It is all the more important today, as immersive computational environments
begin to structure experience beyond the merely instrumental. Computers
increasingly mediate in the interface between the public and the private, art
and politics, mind and body. The simulacrum requires that we advance a
reflective "science of the mimetic arts" lest we lose a sense of what Michael
Taussig has called the "space ulterior to mimesis" [@taussig_mimesis_1993,
129-144]. The suspension of disbelief must remain, as it was in Samuel
Coleridge's original formulation, a willful act, containing further a
"semblance of truth" required to animate the shadows of imagination
[@coleridge_biographia_1917, 6-7]. An involuntary or worse yet forced
suspension of disbelief can only lead to a state of total critical
disempowerment.

The history of human-computer interaction passes through several distinct
stages, each defined by their relationship to representation:

A) Early computers were programmed by physically manipulating a complex
arrangement of wires and relays. With time, that configuration could be
abstracted into symbolic states, signified by visible marks on paper and later
invisible electromagnetic marks on tape.

B) In the next stage of development, physical arrangements of gates and relays
were further codified into an artificial language. Programmers operated with a
constrained vocabulary, sending and receiving messages to the machine, in a
dialog---dubbed "conversational programming"---that resembled human
communication [@cameron_dialog:_1967; @orr_conversational_1968;
@gaines_technology_1981].

C) As computer use spread, the paradigm of so called "direct interaction" or
"direct manipulation" shifted emphasis from verbal cues to visual and from
symbol to icon. The communication was and continues to be direct in the sense
of felt immediacy and immersion.  By comparison to the verbal symbol, an icon
appears to have a relationship to the remote materialities of computational
media less arbitrary than the symbol [@beatty_interactive_1979;
@coltheart_iconic_1980; @hutchins_direct_1986; @gaines_timesharing_1986].

D) Finally, one imagines an indexical connection between human and machine, by
which brain states and machine states could correspond through a physical
rather than merely visual linkage. The so called "direct brain" interfaces
bypass inscription---word and picture---altogether, making use of
neuroprosthetics---implants and surface electrodes---to connect human and
machine [@levine_sp_direct_2000; @wolpaw_brain-computer_2000;
@leuthardt_braincomputer_2004; @hotson_individual_2016].

It would be a mistake however to conflate claims to "directness," at any stage
of interface development, with the absence of mediation. A morphological
grammar always intercedes. Disparate media, brains and machines, require a
grammar of transformation. The grammar sets the terms of engagement.

Before the 1980s, the dominant paradigm of interacting with machines was the
dialog [@shaw_joss:_1964; @cameron_dialog:_1967; @gaines_timesharing_1986;
@martin_computerized_1970; @martin_design_1973]. Already in 1950, Alan Turing
imagined a conversation between an artificially intelligent poet and its
critic:

>`Interrogator:` In the first line of your sonnet which reads "Shall I compare
thee to a summer's day," would not "a spring day" do as well or better?  
>`Witness:` It wouldn't scan.  
>`Interrogator:` How about "a winter's day," That would scan all right.  
>`Witness:` Yes, but nobody wants to be compared to a winter's day.  
>`Interrogator:` Would you say Mr. Pickwick reminded you of Christmas?  
>`Witness:` In a way.  
>`Interrogator:` Yet Christmas is a winter's day, and I do not think Mr. Pickwick
would mind the comparison.  
>`Witness:` I don't think you're serious. By a winter's day one means a typical
winter's day, rather than a special one like Christmas
[@turing_computing_1950].  

The goal of conversational programming was to provide a similarly naturalized
dialog between operators and machines. Although machine understanding of
informal human speech did not develop in earnest until the twenty-first
century, interactive computing environments like DIALOG and JOSS were designed
to lessen the cognitive burden of speaking machine languages by translating
them into dialog systems that understood a limited number of English words.

JOSS, an experimental on-line computing system created by the RAND corporation
in 1963, consisted of a typewriter connected to the JOHNNIAC computer. Prior
to JOSS, programmers would interact with the JOHNNIAC machine via keyboard and
punch card, initially using octal number notation and then binary assembly
language [@gruenberger_history_1979]. These methods of programming were time
consuming and prone to error. "An octal desk calculator was nice to have," a
historian of the system would later quip [@gruenberger_history_1979, 58].

The JOSS experiment introduced the idea of an "interpreter" that sat between
the human operator and machine, facilitating communication in a friendly,
conversational manner. Think of JOSS as a "user's computing aide and a single
contact with the computer," wrote the system's designers [@shaw_joss:_1964,
456]. Instead of feeding punch cards into a mechanism, as was done before,
operators would now use a typewriter. Instead of flipping switches, they typed
words. JOSS thus referred both to a "simple language" for machine instruction
and the new "remote console" way of interacting with computers. JOSS and the
user would "take turns controlling the typewriter" The interpreter understood
simple commands like `do`, `go`, and `type`, which it would then translate
into machine instructions. When encountering an unspecified command, the
interpreter mimicked human confusion, responding simply:
"Eh?"[@shaw_joss:_1964]

A new mode of conversational interaction was captured also in one of the
earliest text adventure games, the *Colossal Cave Adventure*, designed by Will
Crowther in 1975 [@montfort_twisty_2003]. The following dialog illustrates the
call-and-response game play typical of the genre:

> `You are standing at the end of a road before a small brick building. Around
you is a forest. A small stream flows out of the building and down a gully.`
>
>`> enter`
>
> `You are inside a building, a well house for a large spring. There are some
keys on the ground here. There is a shiny brass lamp nearby. There is food
here. There is a bottle of water here.`
>
>`> get keys`
>
> `OK`
>
>`> get lamp`
>
> `OK`
>
>`> exit`
>
> `You're at end of road again.`

Although more accessible and interactive than communication in octal or binary
machine code, the conversational model posed several significant challenges.
It was meant to resemble human communication in all its richness and variety,
where in fact the machine "spoke" and "understood" only a limited number of
words. Researchers from the U.S. Air Force academy would write:

> The lower cost of computer access and the proliferation of on-line systems
produced a new breed of users, people whose expertise was in some area other
than computer technology. As their initial fascination with conversational
computing wore off, users reported experiencing feelings of intense
frustration and of being "manipulated" by a seemingly unyielding, rigid,
intolerant dialogue partner [@walther_-line_1974, 379;
@gaines_timesharing_1986, 15].

The conversational intermediary of *Colossal Cave Adventure* understood
roughly 295 commands and knew about 1,600 words in response, arranged into
several hundred canned phrases.[^ln1-count] Faced with an unfamiliar word, it
could only repeat "That's not a verb I recognise."

By the 1980s, a new breed of metaphorical interfaces gained widespread
prominence. If *Colossal Cave Adventure* epitomized the conversational model
of computing, games like *Pong*, *Space Invaders*, and *Donkey Kong* heralded
the paradigm of "direct manipulation." According to Ben Shneiderman, the
researcher who coined the term in 1982, direct manipulation involved three key
principles:

1. Continuous representation of the object of interest.
2. Physical actions or labelled button presses instead of complex syntax.
3. Rapid incremental reversible operations whose impact on the object of
interest is immediately visible [@shneiderman_future_1982, 251;
@hutchins_direct_1986, 91].

The primary goal of direct manipulation was therefore to achieve accord
between "visual representation" and the "object of interest." Shneiderman
looked to Leibniz for guidance. Leibniz developed a system of symbolic
notation, at the root of his calculus, to express, in his words, "the exact
nature of a thing briefly and, as it were, picture it." For Leibniz, the
symbol, an accurate and portable picture of an idea, could subsequently reduce
the mental effort required for abstract thought, leading to a "great advantage
for discovery" [@leibniz_briefwechsel_1899, 375; @shneiderman_direct_1983,
57].

Symbolic notation made it possible for mathematicians to represent infinitely
small and infinitely large numbers in print---ideas that would not otherwise
fit on the page or in the mind [@cajori_history_1923; @thurston_leibnizs_1973;
@grabiner_is_1974]. For Shneiderman and others, a computer game like Pong
similarly enabled the direct manipulation of complex abstractions, making it
possible for a player to control a virtual table-tennis paddle by rotating a
physical knob on a gaming console. The knob's movement corresponded "directly"
to the movement of the paddle---clockwise for up and counter-clockwise for
down---thus achieving an analogy between the "operation" and its "impact on
the object of interest" [@shneiderman_direct_1983, 60]. Without such "direct"
linkage, the physics of game simulation would be too complex for players to
handle effectively, were they asked to play by writing formulas in code, for
example, or to direct a paddle through dialog, in conversation.

Direct manipulators argued that the arbitrary nature of the sign to its
signifier hindered the conversational model of human-computer interaction.
When using *EMACS*, for example, a text editor commonly found on UNIX systems
of the time, one would enter the command `k` in combination with other keys to
delete or "kill" a file, while on other systems, Shneiderman complained, `k`
stood for "keep a file," the opposite from killing it
[@shneiderman_direct_1983, 65]. In the conversational model, the command stood
in a contingent relationship to the intended effect, whereas in the direct
manipulation model the dial and paddle related mimetically.

In the language of Peircean semiotics, the direct manipulation paradigm
favored the "iconic" relationship between representation and object of
interest, by which the two relate through shared elements of structure and
composition [@peirce_algebra_1992; @jakobson_few_1977; @norman_user_1986,
110]. Consider the game controller for Pong. The dial's rotation mimics the
movement of the paddle it represents. Like an onomatopoeic word, the one
resembles and imitates the other. The central idea of direct manipulation
involved an attempt to move past conversational contingency. Where there were
numerous verbal ways to instruct a machine to return a serve, dials
constrained a player's instrumental vocabulary in one dimension: clockwise or
counterclockwise. These movements are less arbitrary than words, because they
contain a direct topological mapping of properties.

In their field-defining work on human-computer interaction, Edwin Hutchins,
Donald Norman, and James Hollan wrote:

> There is an economy here [referring to direct manipulation] in that
the user's knowledge of the structure of the surface acoustical form has a
non-arbitrary relationship to meaning [...] The same sort of thing can be done
in the design of interface languages [@norman_cognitive_1991, 123].

Influenced by insights from cognitive metaphor theory about structural domain
mapping, direct manipulators thought the mimetic icon to require less
explanation than arbitrary symbol. The transference of iconic qualities is
intuited; the icon presents its own explanation.[^ln1-icon] Instead of
querying a "dictionary" of arbitrary commands the user could rely on
habituated affordances of real-world objects, like table tennis paddles and
paper trashcans. The evolution from "conversational" to "direct" interaction
models of human-computer interaction could thus be viewed as a shift from a
symbolic system of representation, in which signs stood in an arbitrary
relationship to their referents, to an iconic one, in which they related
mimetically.[^ln1-peirce]

Crucially, direct manipulation designers aimed to suspend disbelief. The
feeling of directness came through a complete immersion into the mimetic
context of virtual worlds [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 76]. The mimetic
icon usurped its "object of interest" through use. Screen icons themselves
became objects of interest, at the expense of the underlying mechanisms.
Direct manipulation theory imagined the handling of representations, not
objects---as evidenced by the somewhat strained language of metaphor machines
in which "hierarchies allow access to metaphors within the library" and "users
manipulate sheets in the notebook metaphor" [@pajak_electronic_1992;
@glaser_graphical_1995]. The interaction is direct in the sense of concealing
the mediated nature of virtual experience. The goal is to manufacture what
Laurel and others called an "interactive mimesis" and "first personness"---the
experience of "directly living and acting within the world established by the
computer" [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986; @norman_user_1986, 490-1].

Hutchins, Hollan, and Norman wrote: "when an interface presents world of
action rather than a language of description, manipulating a representation
can have the same effects and the same feel as manipulating the thing being
represented" [@hutchins_direct_1986, 98-99]. Actual instruments of
manipulation---keyboards, screens, and machine instructions---were meant to
disappear, lest they puncture the illusion. "The user of a well-designed
*model world* interface can willfully suspend disbelief that the objects
depicted are artifacts of some program and can thereby directly engage the
world of the objects," Norman et.al. wrote [@hutchins_direct_1986, 99]. The
dialogic model of tool use encouraged by *Colossal Cave Adventure*---`get
keys`, `get lamp`---was seen to stand in the way. Instead of working with
objects of interest---instead of being part of a story---the protagonist was
"using the computer" [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 74]. "End users are not
interested in *making* representations," Laurel wrote. "They want to move
around *inside* one," favoring the mimetic context over their actual, physical
surroundings [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75]. Fully immersive environments
could by contrast support the "sensation of directness," in which direct, that
is iconic, expressions, "behave in such a way that a user can assume that
they, in some sense, *are* the things they refer to" [@hutchins_direct_1986,
110].

!["ViewPoint screen image." On screen menus for the Xerox 6085 Daybreak
workstation, 1985 [@johnson_xerox_1989, 13].](images/figure-2-4.png)

Principles of direct interaction stood against what Laurel called the
mediator's "ill-formed" presence.  Conversational computing now seemed
outdated. It prevented the unmediated "pleasure" and "catharsis" of direct
engagement [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75]. Intermediaries of *Oregon
Train* and *Colossal Cave Adventure* took place of players: they swung swords
for them, took a beating, and reported on the second-hand experience. Laurel
wrote:

> In the file management example, the intermediary takes the form of command
menus that are invoked in order to activate processes in the program that will
create the desired results. The user does not have the experience of pushing
files around, stowing them and grabbing them, or blowing them away. Instead,
the user has the experience of communicating with the file management
intermediary [@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75].

In combination, the ideas behind cognitive domain blending and direct
manipulation gave rise to the now ubiquitous WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You
Get) interfaces, put into mass production by Apple, Xerox, and other companies
in the early- to mid-1980s. The Xerox 8010 Star workstation introduced in 1981
and the Xerox 6085 Daybreak workstation, introduced in 1985, heralded the era
of accessible, metaphor-driven personal computing, characterized by the use of
virtual graphical objects like windows, icons, desktops, folders, and buttons
(Fig 2.4). The Star and Daybreak workstations were some of the earliest
machines to put the principles of metaphoric domain blending and direct
manipulation into action. The interface was meant to reveal the structure of
simulated objects intuitively, without training or lengthy written
explanation. Mimetic interfaces employed "logic and aesthetics," in Laurel's
words, "to create representations that *engage* humans in pleasurable ways"
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 85]. The mimetic context is simply "the
experience we desire," Laurel wrote. Immersion finally enabled actors to
experience "the full pleasure of the mimetic form"
[@laurel_brenda_interface_1986, 75].

Designers advocating direct manipulation understood the compromise that came
with an emphasis on such immersive and pleasurable experiences
[@hutchins_direct_1986, 118]. Effective mimesis assumes user familiarity with
a source domain. We understand what to do with virtual folders, for example,
because we know how paper folders behave in real life. Direct mimetic
manipulation does not however tell us anything new about the capabilities of
such virtual folders. Immersion precludes critical reflection beyond the
pre-defined confines of a modeled world. Users gain access only to what the
simulation warrants. Like a theme park ride, it is a scripted experience,
which leads to predetermined models of engagement.

Problematically, ideas behind mimetic immersion contain a logical fallacy.
Literature on direct manipulation often alludes to car steering. Steering
wheels are a paradigmatic example of interfaces by which inputs and outputs
correlate directly. Thus instead of issuing complicated commands, a driver
turns a wheel. A movement to the right compels a corresponding rightward
motion of the vehicle. A direct, causal link exists between a car's steering
wheel and its axle. Similarly, when interacting with a game like *Space
Invaders* via joystick, players experience the immediate correspondence
between movements of the controlling mechanism and space ship on screen. The
car and space ship are direct objects of interest.

Authors attempting to delete sensitive information---to return to our simple
and reoccurring example---are not, however, interested in the virtual
representation of their documents. The direct object is not mimetic. They want
to erase documents, not their icons. In cases like these, inhabitants of a
virtual world are concerned with objects outside of it. Direct manipulation
instead veils the direct object from view, suspending the rules of physical
interaction in favor of the virtual. Far from being direct, the document's
interface---an iconic image---usurps the physical object, the file itself. By
such circuitous logic, direct manipulation occludes the mechanisms of mimesis.

The occlusion is a loss of resemblances and designations, of the kind that
Baudrillard predicted. At its logical extreme, the simulacrum supplants the
thing being simulated. It appears as hyper-reality, the experience of
unmediated interaction without awareness or sense of the underlying referent.
All "objects of interest" within such a model world are fabricated objects.
They are thus limited to the external, artificial constraints imposed by their
makers. Manufactured metaphors present us, the "users," with compelling,
possibly cathartic, experience. The metaphor extends far beyond entertainment,
subsuming all spheres of social activity mediated by computers.

The history of human-computer interaction began with the manipulation of
physical switches, first by hand and then by proxy, through removable storage
media like paper tape and punch card. The next phase was dialogic and
conversational. Conversational computing introduced the idea of a mediating
agent, an interpreter, which could translate a limited number of natural human
language commands into a specialized vocabulary of signals that changed
machine configuration states. The "direct manipulation" school dispensed with
visible machine states, leading us further towards immersive mimesis in which
virtual environments resemble real-world objects and their properties by
analogy. Viewing that history in light of metaphor theory, I find myself
suspicious of a totalizing mimesis: the more compelling the simulation, the
more removed from its material contexts, the more concealed the logistics of
its production. The manipulation of metaphors---a reflective, not merely
circumspect inhabitance of virtual worlds---requires not just a willing
suspension of disbelief, but also a willful poetics. The suspension of
disbelief otherwise threatens to become a permanent condition, alienating as
it is pleasurable or cathartic.

## Speculative Formalism

To what extent do we, as a society, need to perceive the mechanisms that
animate such machine metaphors? Most drivers lack the knowledge to explain
internal combustion, the argument goes. Why insist on it when it comes to
computers? Computers, I would like to reflect in conclusion, are dissimilar to
cars in that they are epistemic artifacts. They have the potential to affect
all symbol-bearing areas of human activity. Contemporary automobiles are in
fact computers to the extent that they host inscription. They contain texts
that can be interpreted, not in a fanciful way by which all culture is a text,
but literally: involving a succession of printed marks within a conduit.
Self-driving "smart" cars differ from their mechanical "dumb" counterparts in
that they contain symbolic content. A law governing pedestrian traffic
embodies also a model of reading and comprehension; it is meant to be
understood by its subjects. Codes governing self-driving vehicles do not
answer to the same political ideals. They are not always legible or open to
interpretation. We must insist on reading them for the same reason we read
books and codices. They augment not just the foot, but our collective sense of
shared intelligence. The structure of symbolic representation---its storage
and codification---constitutes our cognitive and ultimately political
scaffolding.

In a paper remarking on "The Genesis and Speed of Telegraph Codes" published
in the *Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society* in 1949, Frank G.
Halstead noted that "the practical upper limits of [telegraph transmission]
speed will also be limited by the ability of some human beings to operate a
keyboard, until such time as electrical connection be made direct with the
receiver's central nervous system" [@halstead_genesis_1949, 451].

At the time of writing this book, our society stands at the threshold of a new
symbolism. Direct brain to computer interfaces are common enough today to be
turned into a toy.[^ln3-mindflex] Early brain-computer interfaces relied on
either imprecise "noisy" electroencephalographic (EEG) scalp sensors or on
electrode implants that required invasive surgery. In 2004 a team of
scientists developed a way of controlling "a one-dimensional computer cursor
rapidly and accurately" using electrocorticographic (ECoG) activity recorded
from the surface of the brain [@leuthardt_braincomputer_2004;
@miller_spectral_2007]. And in 2015, a quadriplegic woman piloted an F-35
Joint Strike Fighter using her brain in a simulation developed by the
University of Pittsburgh's Human Engineering Research Laboratories in
collaboration with the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
[@collinger_collaborative_2014; @prabhakar_how_2015].

On the surface, the advance of brain-computer interfaces seems to bring us
closer to the trajectory of growing immediacy: witness the "no interface"
movement in graphic design and its continuing promise of ever more direct
interaction. *No Interface*, *Don't Make me Think*, and *Hooked: How to Build
Habit-Forming Products* are some of the best selling titles advancing this
argument [@krug_dont_2014; @eyal_hooked:_2014; @krishna_best_2015]. Military
applications aside, we must prepare for a future in affective, mystical arts,
the ultimate loss of references and resemblances, where semiotic systems are
to be experienced emotively past the senses: literature without language or
representation, painting beyond media, asemiosis---messages lacking a sign.

However futuristic such possibilities may seem to us today, we should not lose
sight of the constructed nature of human-computer interaction in all of its
forms: paper, ink, code, silicone. Media mediate. But they also grow opaque
through habituation. As technological dreams become reality they also grow
mundane. We forget to marvel at the altitude of artificial flight or remark on
the speed of telecommunication. Habit dulls the instrument. The tool recedes
from view. We forget its dangers. It seems a harmless extension of the body.

I do not mean to dismiss the mastery of those engaged in creating the illusion
of directness. Pleasure and catharsis are important in some contexts. In other
contexts, we must privilege critical thought, analysis, and interruption. The
momentary breach, to quite Heidegger, a measure of discomfort in the fit
between bodies, keyboards, and screens ensures our ability to shape the
encounter on our own, tactical terms: to opt in when useful and to opt out
when necessary.[^ln2-heid] I am not concerned here with the metaphysical
entailments of a possible posthuman future. The illusion of directness belies
the very human mechanisms of command and control. Simulations ultimately
embody specific power structures in an economy of exchange between physical
and mental resources. In this market there are those who extract rents from
virtual, mimetic inhabitance and those whose dwelling becomes a commodity.

Recall in this regard the Heideggerian insight into the mediated nature of
tool use. In *Being and Time*, Heidegger wrote about the particular
*handiness* of a tool, like a hammer. He writes, "the less we stare at the
thing [...] the more actively we use it, the more original our relation to it
becomes and the more undisguisedly it is encountered as what it is, a useful
thing" [@heidegger_being_1996, 65]. For Heidegger, a tool like a hammer had to
be understood through use. It was inaccessible to reason or theory alone. A
hammer comes into focus through what he called *circumspection*
[*Umsicht*]---the peripheral awareness of the object ready-to-hand
[*zuhanden*] [@heidegger_sein_1967, 69]. One relates to the tool in the
process of manipulating it, while concentrating on the task at hand: the
seamster is not interested in the needle, only in the work of sewing
[@heidegger_being_1996, 65]. Later, Heidegger would connect his account of
tool use with philosophy itself, as a mode of truth seeking or unconcealment
[@heidegger_question_1977, 319]. When used properly, tools reveal some truth
about the world, about people using them, and about tool use itself. In this
sense the Greek *techne* is for Heidegger related to *poiesis*, or bringing
forth.

Contrary to the kind of technology that reveals and brings forth, Heidegger
describes also instrument use that conceals and blocks poiesis. Such
technologies determine rather than reveal. They are a "destined" kind of
revealing that unfolds along a predetermined narrative, in which the answer is
already given. A forester that walks the wood simply to cut it down can only
discover its nature as a commodity, in what Heidegger calls a "standing
reserve." The forester who measures felled timber becomes subordinate to the
organization of cellulose. The wood is challenged forth by the need of paper,
the paper to the press. The press consequently organizes the public, set on
"swallowing what is printed, so that a set configuration of opinion becomes
available on demand." In following a determined path, technology turns humans
into human resources. Modern technology is "no more a human doing," Heidegger
concludes [@heidegger_question_1977, 323-4]. Proscribed tool use strips users
of their powers of self-determination. They learn nothing new about themselves
nor the world.

I would like to imagine in closing the possibility of indexical interfaces,
the kind of signs that connect to their objects of interest through palpable
causal linkages like smoke and fire, tissue damage and pain. Is it possible,
in other words, to inhabit virtual worlds in breach: to continually catch
glimpses of their scaffolding? The question is of vital political importance,
because whether we have answers or not, implements of symbolic
manipulation---books and pens that once lay safely at an arm's length---move
inevitably closer to the mind's eye. For now, screens and hard drives,
mechanisms of memory storage and image projection, remain extrinsic to the
body. They are at this moment still amenable to limited circumspection. The
political consequences of technology become more difficult to imagine in
proportion to their habituation. Today, people who forego the use of
electronic tablets, smart phones, laptops, and notebooks could seem merely
whimsical or quaint. What if tomorrow they be judged mentally deficient or
barred from participating fully in the public life?

The human is endangered not by technology, Heidegger wrote, but by its
determination [@heidegger_question_1977, 331-4]. The ability to read and write
was always politically fraught because of its potential to affect human
experience. It is by no accident that the struggle for universal literacy
often accompanied political revolutions. Poets are important to the revolution
not because they create beautiful aesthetic objects, but because they retain
the non-instrumental, emancipatory potential of reading and writing. What can
be said in parallel about digital literacy, the poetry of embodied and
embedded devices? What if we fail to develop a sense of computational poetics
in the face of frenzied instrumental development? How can one empty the hand,
the mind, in breach of technesis?

<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->

[^ln1-analogy]: It bears mentioning at the outset that in the language of
cognitive metaphor theory all figurative tropes of comparison---hyperbole,
metonymy, synecdoche, or simile---fall under the category of metaphor.

[^ln1-carroll]: @carroll_annotated_1960, 55. See @huxley_raven_1976 and
@susina_why_2001 for a range of possible answers, including Carroll's own:
"Because it can produce a few notes, though they are very flat; and it is
nevar [sic] put with the wrong end in front" [@carroll_alices_1971, xv;
@susina_why_2001, 16-7].

[^ln1-count]: Rick Adams maintains the source code for a number of the game's
early versions at http://rickadams.org/adventure/e_downloads.html.  I ran
`tr`, `uniq`, and `wc` Unix utilities against the PDP-10 Fortran sources to
calculate vocabulary. Later versions of the game contain a slightly enriched
lexicon.

[^ln1-dead]: For a book length discussion of dead metaphors see
@muller_metaphors_2008.

[^ln1-greek]: In modern Greek metaphor is the ordinary word for
transportation, often inscribed on trucks and shipping containers.

[^ln2-heid]: See @heidegger_being_1996, 70: "When something at hand is missing
whose everyday presence was a matter of course that we never even paid
attention to it, this constitutes a *breach* in the context of references
discovered in our circumspection. Circumspection comes up with emptiness and
now sees for the first time what the missing thing was at hand *for* and at
hand *with*. Again the surrounding world makes itself known."

[^ln1-icon]: I am using the traditional Peircian distinction between symbol,
icon, and index. Peirce writes "icons are are so completely substituted for
their objects as hardly to be distinguished from them" [@peirce_algebra_1992,
226].

[^ln1-metalakoff]: @lakoff_contemporary_1998, 245. See also
@turner_conceptual_1995; @ruiz_de_mendoza_ibanez_nature_1998;
@lakoff_invariance_2009.

[^ln3-mindflex]: The American toy giant Mattel makes a game called "Mindflex."
The Frequently Asked Questions page includes the following prompt: "Have you
ever dreamed of moving an object with the power of your mind? Mindflex Duel™
makes that dream a reality! Utilizing advanced Mindflex Duel™ technology, the
wireless headset reads your brainwave activity. Concentrate...and the ball
rises on a cushion of air! Relax...and the ball descends. It's literally mind
over matter!" (@mindflex_mindflex:_2015)

[^ln1-nested]: The notion of "digital text" is itself a metaphor. Files do not
really hold texts. The idea of "text" identifies a segment of stored memory
coupled with control codes that govern layout and projection in specific
material context. Together, these diverse signals and physical affordances
create the illusion of a single text.

[^ln1-peirce]: Charles Sanders Peirce, a philosopher of language whose
vocabulary I have been using here, suggests Simulacra as a possible synonym
for Icon, citing also Plato's *Phaedrus* in relation to the Greek `omoiōma` or
imitation. See @peirce_excerpts_1998, 481; @plato_euthyphro._1999, 250a-b.

[^ln1-rmedium]: See @ricoeur_interpretation_1976, 26: "The most obvious change
from speaking to writing concerns the relation between message and its medium
or channel. At first glance, it concerns only this relation, but upon closer
examination, the first alteration irradiates in every direction, affecting in
a decisive manner all the factors and functions."

\newpage
