# Chapter 3: Projection

`digital, medium, mode`

To grasp the peculiarity of the computed sign stretched between the sites of
archive and projection we will have to build a shared vocabulary that includes
terms both technical and literary critical. The following three chapters trace
the passage of the inscription through the computational device, beginning
with its apparent, outward shape on the screen. The screen has this one major
peculiarity: it refreshes itself multiple times per second.  Thus even those
shapes that appear to stand still on the screen move in the realm beyond the
threshold of human perception. We are vaguely aware of this movement: it is
commonly visible when a screen appears on another screen, as it does in
documentary films that show someone in the process of typing at the computer
terminal or watching television. The difference in the flicker rates between
the projector showing the image and the projector "in the frame" is what
produces the characteristic horizontal interference pattern. The illusion of
motion is key to understanding the mechanics of cinema, but what does it mean
to perceive seemingly static words against the background of a fundamentally
dynamic medium? Instead of a static and immutable sign etched in stone or on
paper we observe the sign in motion. To refer to the "illusion" of digital
textuality is therefore to identify the dynamic property of projection. To
place text on the screen is to bring it closer to the moving image. What
happens to literature that takes place on cinema screen?

In this chapter, I bring archival material---blueprints, phenomenological
accounts, and debates in the philosophy of aesthetics---to bare on the
question of projection. The nature of "digital" experience, as I will argue,
depends on some notion of "natural" and "analog" mode of human perception. The
change of *medium* from paper to pixel entails a corresponding change in the
*mode* of perception. The projection "attunes" if you will the viewer to the
message.  By attunement I mean something analogous to what Marcel Mauss called
the "techniques of the body" [@mauss_techniques_2006, 78]: the way in which we
sit for example, the position of the hands, the head, or the movement of the
eyes. The mode *structures* experience. It answers the how of perception.

Initially, we must simply know how to perceive: to look, to smell, or to
listen. The modality tells us "the register" of the message. Where to look for
it and how to identify its signifying elements. In refined arts it goes
further to more strictly govern the techniques of the body: you must neither
speak nor cough during a classical recital, for example. One can look at but
not touch artwork in a museum. As these examples show, the modality of
communication ultimately demands corporal compliance. For this reason, the
change in modalities must always be perceived as a claim on the body. In this
lies the starkest difference between analog and digital media. The shift from
one to the other affects not the message but the mode of perception. It is as
if someone has asked you to read a book or to watch a film in a stranger's
armchair. It feels off in a way that is difficult to explain. The mode of
digital perception similarly contorts the body into new and unfamiliar shapes.
I begin then with popular intuitions about the digital. The "two terminators"
of the introductory section lead us to the technical particulates of
projection and finally to the discussion on the aesthetics of digital
perception.

## Digital Wake (My Two Terminators)

What does the digital look like? It looks blue for one---not just any kind of
blue, but a particularly cool shade of pure blue, which passes from dark to
white, to translucent with starburst-like overtones. An online image search
for the word "digital" produces many sharp, sterile visuals of that kind.
Abstract geometrical patterns predominate in the first dozen or so search
results: often forming curved, three-dimensional tunnels or lines that
resemble circuit boards. There are things too of course, cheap and expensive
consumer things like scanners, flash cards, circuit boards, and backup drives,
but most of all it is cameras---digital cameras, the very idea of which is
meant to stand in stark contrast to "traditional film photography." Few
marketplace objects exhibit such a strong sense of the opposition between the
digital and the analog as a consumer camera. These search pages also contain
the outdated clich√©s of yesterday's digital detritus: digital clocks, purple
lightning bolts, and the abstract chrome landscapes made widely available by
graphic editing software in the 1990s. There are numbers. The preferred
arrangement is in a torrential grid---the matrix---descending in the
background, behind a generic humanoid form, also translucent. Or better yet:
alphanumeric characters comprising a globe or a face. Ones and zeros are best
arranged as an unending string, which runs at a slight angle on the Z-axis and
beyond the frame, foregrounding whatever object that is meant to take on the
digital as a property: the digital wake.

When we constrict the image-search chronologically to the twenty-first
century, we see these cool-blue images give way to a more varied palette:
bright prime greens, yellows, and reds in retro-geometric pixelated shapes.
Pixels take the place of numbers here---not the small, invisible pixels of
contemporary computer screens, but the large and boxy pixels that by their
very visible boxiness flaunt the digital being of the image. Such an image
alludes to the time when pixels really did stand out as individual units---the
technology not being refined enough to produce the illusion of visual
continuity. This faux lo-fi aesthetic likely appeals to the romantic nostalgia
many feel for the early days of computing, and yet it also works as an
assertion of independence from that history. No longer shall the digital serve
to emulate reality, nor be judged merely by its degree of lifelike
verisimilitude. The blocky world of Markus Persson's *Minecraft* (2009) stands
in antithesis to the magical realism of Cyan's *Myst* (1995), the best-selling
graphic-adventure PC game of the twentieth century. Where the critics lauded
the latter for its moody and atmospheric photo-realistic environments, the
former embraces the playful, 8-bit, low-fidelity aesthetic of gaming consoles
from the 1980s. The pseudo-pixelated world of Minecraft encourages its
inhabitants to experiment with deconstruction, producing cuboid landscapes
that foreground discontinuity of form and surface.

The iconography of the digital works in the other direction too, by approaching
and challenging the perceived continuity of the analog world. Liquid-metal
*Photoshop* font effects are thus supplanted by hyperrealistic renderings of
fire, smoke, and water: fluid elements that are by their very nature difficult
to render digitally, especially in movement. Digital alchemy approaches the
boundaries of technological possibility, but absent the constraints of realism
it pushes past reality, past nature, and past mere fidelity to the natural
world. A real-world explosion caught on film looks cheap in comparison to its
cinematic "special-effects" simulacrum. A blazing corporate logo rendered
digitally would lose much of its appeal were it produced by literally lighting
a logograph on fire. The burning digital logograph does not just say "We are
hot" or "We are on fire" (that would be too naive)---it says that our fire is
better than fire, more vivid and more lifelike. The digital fire is the ideal,
Platonic image of fire: an image that all fires should emulate.

I am eliciting these digital commonplaces to get at the conflicting popular
intuitions about "the digital" as something at once discrete, angular, and
therefore reductive and deterministic, but also shiny, smooth, perfect, and
liquid in the way that threatens to drown out and to transcend (instead of
reducing or determining) everything susceptible to the patina of time,
everything having distinct shape and anatomy. Think here about the transition
between films *The Terminator* and *Terminator 2*, where the "bad" robot that
sets out to destroy humanity is cast at first in the guise of an animatronic
mechanism, but then as an amorphous puddle of mercury that makes the original
mechanical Arnold look like a friend and savior. The first terminates with
shotguns and tire irons, where the second morphs into human shapes and pours
itself inside, threatening life from within.

Like the terminators of yesteryear, digital sprites and bogeymen lose their
hold over popular imagination. Digital photography, digital clocks, and
digital humanities already ring archaic in their futuristic ambition, going the
way of e- or i- anything: the way of retro-suffixes like -bot, -mat, -lux, and
-tron. The digital dissolves into the everyday as all clocks, all books, all
texts, and all human activity passes through some form of "digital being." My
aim here and throughout is to understand what is meant by its evocation: to
"come to terms," to make visible, to disturb it, to denature, and to make it
strange again.

Although the quality of being digital plays a central role in the formation of
new compounds like "digital media," "digital humanities," or the "digital
divide," the very idea of what it means often contains entirely conflicting
qualities. For some, digitality stands in opposition to the notion of
naturally "analog" human experience. On this view, digital media reduce
"fuzzy" and indeterminate human experience to something binary, discrete, and
deterministic. For example, in his influential monograph *The Cultural Logic
of Computation* David Golumbia insists that "languages are not codes." Human
language practice for him therefore should not be reduced to a "single correct
interpretation" or "at the absolute limit, a determinate number of discrete
interpretations" [@golumbia_cultural_2009, 291]. "To submit a phenomenon to
computation," Golumbia writes, "is to striate otherwise-smooth details, analog
details" [@golumbia_cultural_2009, 159]. Following Deleuze, Golumbia conceives
of "striated space" in opposition to spaces "smooth" and "analog" like brains,
society, politics, language, and baseball [@golumbia_cultural_2009, 231 &
343]. For Golumbia, striated and digital phenomena fall under suspicion
because "our society is already oriented towards binarisms, hierarchy, and
instrumental rationality" [@golumbia_cultural_2009, 3043].

In his essay against digital humanities, Stephen Marche worries about the
digitization of human experience for the opposite reason. Smoothness, in his
view, is a property of the machine. "Meaning is mushy," he writes:

> Meaning falls apart. Meaning is often ugly, stewed out of weakness and
> failure. It is as human as the body, full of crevices and prey to diseases.
> It requires courage and a certain comfort with impurity to live with.
> Retreat from the smoothness of technology is not an available option, even
> if it were desirable. The disbanding of the papers has already occurred, a
> splendid fluttering of the world's texts to the winds. We will have to
> gather them all together somehow. But the possibility of a complete,
> instantly accessible, professionally verified and explicated, free global
> library is more than just a dream. Through the perfection of our smooth
> machines, we will soon be able to read anything, anywhere, at any time.
>
>Insight remains handmade [@marche_literature_2012].

In this vision, digital artifacts now fall under suspicion for smoothing out
difference and thereby for betraying some essential, wonderfully messy
property of being human.

Stanley Fish, another prominent critic of the digital humanities, writes in a
similar vein. The traditional humanities for Fish exist within the "linear,
temporal medium in the context of which knowledge is discrete, partial and
situated---knowledge at this time and this place experienced by this limited
being." By contrast, the digital humanities imagine a "steady yet dynamic
state where there is movement and change, but no center, no beginning and end,
just all middle." The digital vision is meant to deliver us from linearity and
from time itself, Fish argues [@fish_digital_2012]. For Fish, the digital
fails because it does not offer *enough* difference:

> Delivered from linearity, from time-bound, sharply delineated meanings, from
> mortality, from death, everyone, no longer a one, will revel in and
> participate in the universal dance, a "mystical dance" of "mazes intricate,
> / Eccentric, intervolved, yet regular / Then most when most irregular they
> seem, / And in their motions harmony divine / So smooths her charming tones,
> that God's own ear / Listens delighted. (John Milton, "Paradise Lost," V,
> 620, 622-627)

Whether too discrete or too continuous, the critics agree on the danger of
digitization. Digital being takes place of determinism and mechanization in
the role of the age-old opponent to humanism. Whether it is Plato discussing
the role of writing in *Phaedrus*, or Fish discussing the development of
digital humanities through Milton, the critics worry that successive modes of
representation fail to weave the human experience into the fabric of new
media. New media thus always retreats from some previously constructed
category of the human, with one audience applauding the liberatory, post-human
potential of the motion and the other lamenting its potential for destruction
and demise. It is not a surprise then to often find the notion of the human
close to the debates around digital and analog modes of representation.  A
vision of the humanity is always at stake, with all its spiritual and
political consequences.

Because the apprehension of media is grounded at some basic level in the
physical capabilities of human perception, new media affect the very notion of
what it means to be human. I mean this beyond simply "new ways of seeing" in a
way a telescope or a camera can be thought of as an extension of human the
eye. I am interested first in the challenge digital media pose to humanity as
a *determined* category. The repeated contradictions in the conversation about
digital media expose historically contingent anxieties. Both orthodoxies of
humanism and the futuristic ambition of post-humanism are therefore displaced
onto the same digital--analog continuum. However, the material conditions of
media production do not allow for social constructivism unmoored from the
senses. The development of telegraphs and televisions *intrinsically* depends
on the limits of human perception. The illusion disappears when the projection
flickers much slower than 60 frames per second, for example. We are left then
somewhere between social constructivism and technological determinism. A
historical account of digital media must therefore acknowledge both the
contingent and the essential characteristics of perception. In what follows I
offer several case studies that challenge commonly expressed intuitions in the
conversation about digital media. Ultimately, we will see that what appears at
first to be a property of media is in fact a claim on the mode of perception.

## Spiritual Telegraph

Let us first note that the contemporary attempt to "fix" human experience
somewhere on the spectrum between discrete and continuous representation in
relation to digital computers echoes a similar conversation about the
electrical telegraph at the turn of the previous century. The parallels
suggest that what we may now perceive as an essential quality of some extant
corporeal technique---writing by hand, for example---in fact constitutes an
arbitrary relationship between technology and some naturalized idea of the
human. Consider the spiritual conversations surrounding the development of the
telegraph in the beginning of the twentieth century. At the time before the
standardization of the telegraph alphabets, multiple ways of translating
language into electrical signal competed for their share of the rapidly
growing telecommunications market. In particular, a well-publicised feud
emerged between proponents of direct current- (DC) and alternating current-
(AC) based systems. A few technical details are necessary to understand how an
argument about engineering designs gained a metaphysical significance.

Telegraph systems based on the neutral direct current design assumed current
flow for some elements of the encoding (like dashes) and absence of current
flow for others (like dots) [@welk_neutral_2000].[^ln3-ndc] Systems based on
the alternating current design converted Morse code (and other encoding
systems) into pulses of alternating positive and negative current, where
positive current could stand for "dashes" and negative for "dots." Direct
current designs preferred the use of the "saw tooth," "square" periodic
waveforms to represent binary states. They signal was either "on" or "off"
with nothing in between. By contrast, literature on alternating current
designs often argued for the use of the more round, sinusoidal signal. The
sinusoidal wave could be modulated into a multitude of states beyond binary
[@crehore_practical_1900; @hausmann_telegraph_1915, 374]. Instead of being
just "on" or "off" it offered measurable points of current intensity along the
curve of the sine wave. Consequently, alternating current designs tended
towards the transmission of continuous quantities like images and cursive
handwriting. The very visual form of the sinusoidal curve suggested a
connection to natural, organic shapes, like handwriting. The alternating
current suggested a visual analogy between the thing being transmitted
(picture or text) and electrical signal.

The Pollak-Virag telegraph that Bernhard Siegert mentions in his seminal essay
on German media theory was one such device.[^ln3-virag] The original
Pollak-Virag machine patented in 1900 proposed to send regular Morse encoding
by means of alternating current of two different polarities and two different
strengths, for a total of four types of signals.[^ln3-siegert] Other than the
irregular signal shape and the use of alternating current, the Pollak-Virag
encoding differed little from single-Morse systems. By 1901, however, the
authors were issued an American patent for the "Writing Telegraph," which
builds on their previous design in an interesting way. Rather than using a
wave in four steps, the authors propose an "automatic transmitter capable of
sending current impulses over the line which correspond to the direction and
the size of a single letter element" [@pollak_writing-telegraph_1901, 3]. In
other words, they wanted to bend the sinusoidal wave to correspond roughly to
the shape of the letter. In this way, the letter "s," to pick an easy example,
could be transmitted by the means of an s-shaped wave.

![Record obtained at the receiving station, illustration from "Means for
Rapidly Transmitting Telegrams," 1900
[@pollak_means_1900].](images/virag-wave.png)

The Pollak-Virag encoding thus proposed to constitute an electrical alphabet
analogous to cursive writing: "to trace in a substantially continuous unbroken
outline the written letters composing the matter transmitted"
[@pollak_writing-telegraph_1901, 1]. Yet, where Goldberg's punch cards aimed
to achieve the analogy on the level of encoding (the punches took the shape of
letters), Pollak and Virag aimed to do at the level of the medium itself (the
signal took the shape of letters). To achieve the effect, the engineers broke
cursive script down into distinct vertical and horizontal elements. The
Pollak-Virag *encoding* thus represented a continuous quality (cursive script)
through discrete atomic elements, as punches that moved the writing stylus up,
down, left, or right. For this reason, it would be a mistake to understand the
Pollak-Virag telegraph as a purely analog device. The analogy is rather
achieved through a process of discrete analytic atomization of script on
ticker tape and its subsequent reconstitution into a continuous shape.

![Writing Telegraph, 1901 [@pollak_writing-telegraph_1901].](images/virag.png)

Pollak and Virag believed that their sine wave telegraph had the distinct
advantage transmitting messages "recorded in ordinary written or script
characters." In the language of the patent, other forms of "facsimile"
telegraph transmitted merely the "conventional form" of the letter, and not
the letter itself. By contrast, the Pollak-Virag system was in their words
"non-autographic." The autographic telegraph preserved the particularity of
the human hand. It purported to transmit not only the conventional form of the
letter, but the peculiarity of an individual's signature. It was the humane
telegraph in the sense that it preserved something human. The metaphysics
accompanying telegraph communication at the time were in fact often concerned
with human erasure. Notions of material discreteness and continuity
represented not mere physical attributes of encoding or electricity but
higher-order cultural and even ethical categories. The underlying physical
structure of communication seemed to affect the very notion of what it means
to be human.

Beneath the technical conversations about the advantages of discrete or
continuous electrical signal lay a philosophic concern with the fundamental
makeup of the universe itself. For Henri Bergson, one of the most prominent
philosophers of the time, the "real whole of the universe" constituted an
"indivisible continuity" [@bergson_creative_1944, 36]. Science, technology,
and other "artificial systems" in Bergson's thought impose discrete "partial
views" on the whole.[^ln3-bergsonism] The partial views, for Bergson, resemble
the operation of the cinematograph, which divides continuous motion into
distinct frames. By putting the frames into the apparatus, we are thus able to
"reconstitute the individuality of each particular movement." "Such is the
contrivance of the cinematograph," Bergson writes. "And such is also that of
our knowledge" [@bergson_creative_1944, 332]. In this way, the intellect
continually separates the undifferentiated reality into discrete states of
time and space [@bergson_creative_1944, 167-182; @russell_philosophy_1914, 4].
But these states are virtually, not actually, discrete. The evolution of life
proceeds "rather like a shell" which "bursts into fragments," which are
themselves again shells [@bergson_creative_1944, 109].

On such a view of the universe, the brain and the central nervous system act
as a kind of a "central telephonic exchange," which communicates between the
extrinsic continuous world and the intrinsic "snapshots" stored in memory
[@bergson_matter_1912, 19]. The mind receives "images" of the world that it
compares with existing "stored" images to produce a kind of a new composite
image that is then again stored into memory, and so on. With this in mind,
Bergson denies the "flashlight" model of discovering facts about the world.
The mind does not shine a light to bring attention to this or that hidden
feature of the world. "Metaphor for metaphor, we would rather compare the
elementary work of attention to that of the telegraph clerk who, on receipt of
an important dispatch, sends it back again, word for word, in order to check
its accuracy" [@bergson_matter_1912, 129]. The object is thus neither an
independent thing nor purely a product of the mind. By this "telegraphic"
picture, Bergson avoids both fully relativistic and fully essentialist
accounts of knowledge making.

Of course to agree with Bergson is to take on the model of the mind as a
cinematographic "framing" device along with a model of the world that is *a
priori* continuous in nature. In a damning evaluation of Bergson's philosophy,
Bertrand Russel notes that such assumptions are merely poetic images, not
subject to falsification [@russell_philosophy_1914, 24]. They hold the truth
of poetry, as Russel writes, not truth of physics or philosophy. Bergson
assumes the world to constitute a continuous system and the mind a discrete
one, akin to a telegraph. To this day, one would find it difficult to find
scientific consensus on such topics as the "digital make up of the physical
world" or on the continuity of conciousness. And there was certainly no
consensus on the matter at the time. The analogy between the mind and the
telegraph falls apart when one considers that even the nature of telegraphy
was ultimately at question.

For example, writing for the Swedenborg-inspired[^ln3-swedenborg] *Spiritual
Telegraph* in 1854, an anonymous author unfolds a kind of a theological media
theory, which hinges on the ultimately discrete nature of the universe.
"Whenever two persons are brought into sympathetic relations," he writes
"either by corporeal contact or through those refined media which pervade the
Universe and serve as the airy vehicles of thought, they mutually feel the
presence of each other." In this relationship "the mind which is gifted with
the greater degree of activity and power" at once attains a hierarchal
relation to the lesser intellect, becoming "the proximate cause and fountain
of inspiration to the other" [@brittan_spiritual_1854, 169]. God naturally
occupies the highest point of such a pyramid: "from sources superior to
ourselves, the very elements of life and thought flow into us, and every
living thing, according to its nature and discrete degree, derives a kind of
inspiration from that which is above." The "discrete degree" must be
preserved, because without it the hierarchy would lose meaning.  Thus "in
order to facilitate the transmission of impressions," "the recipient" of the
vital flow "must be willing to receive instruction and assume the passive or
negative relation of a learner." Without discreteness and without hierarchy
"he will be likely to resist unconsciously, the infusion of foreign
impressions and Divine ideas" [@brittan_spiritual_1854, 169]. In this
essentially telegraphic model of the universe, to deny the step-wise hierarchy
of "refined media" is to close oneself off to the "transmission of
impressions," in a communication act (consisting of a "contact" and the
exchange of signifying "thought vehicles") between "source superior" and the
"receiver of instructions," who are placed in a binary and opposing relation
("negative" but without "resistance") to the idea of the divine.

Contrary to the intuition that would associate the discrete view of the
universe with determinism and its consequent threat to the idea of free will,
telegraph spiritualists instead associate determinism with continuity.
Witness George Dole writing in his *Philosophy of Creation*:

> Scientists have prosecuted research on the plane of *continuous degrees of
> the ultimates*, and they have thereby failed to penetrate to *interior
> things of discrete degree* [emphasis mine]. Consequently they derive life as
> not from the Lord, but from nature, of which they have no other idea than
> that it is something mechanical [@dole_philosophy_1906].

Continuity for the spiritual telegraphists must be shunned because it mixes
the sacred with the profane. For the spiritualist, a truly Christian order
must remain digital. To maintain otherwise would be to propagate the Gnostic
heresy [@edwards_neglected_1990; @shaked_dualism_2005, 52-71].

Where Bergson believed the telegraph to translate continuous "analog"
experience into discrete "digital" snapshots, the Swedenborgian mystic sees it
as a model of communication that maintains fidelity to the hidden order of a
well-differentiated and discrete universe. The intuitions from one model to
another are completely reversed. In this way, when arguing in opposition to
sine-wave telegraphy in 1905, Donald Murray, whose alphabet would become the
basis for modern character encodings like ASCII and UTF-8, displays a similar
bias against analog quantities, which for him, cannot capture complex human
activity like writing or dance. "About ten years ago, there was a brisk
discussion in some of the electrical journals in regards to simple harmonic
curve or sine wave for the transmission of power by by the alternating
current," he writes, continuing:

> If Smith wants to make Jones spin round like a dancing Dervish, the best way
> might be for Smith to transmit sine waves [...] but in practice Smith always
> wants to make Jones perform an excessively complicated and irregular series
> of motions, and for this purpose it is essential to transmit similar motions
> by introducing upper harmonics in a fragmentary, non-periodic, and very
> irregular way [@murray_setting_1905, 559].

Like Stephen Marche and Stanley Fish after him, and unlike Bergson or David
Golumbia, Murray assumes that human experience is discrete by nature. For
Murray it is therefore the regular and continuous sine wave that falls under
metaphysical suspicion. Human experience, in this view, must be analogous to
the saw-tooth wave, both having the qualities of being fragmentary,
non-periodic, and irregular. By contrast, the sine wave has the exotic
characteristics of being cyclical, repetitive, and continuous. The shape of
the square wave more closely resembles Murray's normative vision of modern
human culture.[^ln3-dervish] But how or why would *any* piece of technology
confirm to some "natural" state of human affairs?  The very evocation of
normative discourse in this context belies a kind of a technological
essentialism, reductive of both culture and cognition. Neither can be reduced
to some facile notions of "discrete" or "continuous" representation.

It is tempting to think of the telegraph as a digital [*sic*] apparatus,
created to convert analog [*sic*] input into electric signal.[^ln3-tele] The
innards of the Pollak-Virag telegraph for example reveal complex dynamics that
involve long chains of trans-coding and trans-mediation. Think about the media
involved alone: to be transmitted, the signal travels through biological
"wetware," ink and paper, the mechanical action of cogs and wheels, and
finally, through copper wire by means of an electric signal. In the process,
language, already a discrete and portable representation of thought, undergoes
a number of further material-phase transformations. In the writing telegraph,
this involves what I have been calling transmediation: from notebook to paper
tape to the movement of an electromagnetic vibrator to the recording mirror
galvanometer into the copper wire to the receiving vibrator and into the
machinations of the printing apparatus that once again produces ink and
alphabet. This entire system further participates in the complexities of the
human neurological apparatus, involving heptic, visual, and cognitive
feedback. In moving from one medium to another, language undergoes multiple
changes of encoding: within the Pollak-Virag telegraph from script to
perforation, from mechanical movement to the shape of the sinusoidal
electrical impulse, and back out through a series of transformations into
script.

Blueprints for the writing telegraph reveal a device that mixes discrete and
continuous modes of representation, through multiple acts of transcoding and
transmediation. Digitality, in that sense, is besides the point. The telegraph
is a device that pushes language, normally bound to air (as speech) and paper
(as a writing system), through water and metal. Even today, deep beneath the
sea surface, telegraph lines ferry messages from continent to continent. And at
each end of the telegraph cable is a transmediation device that makes media
transference possible. I use the word "media" here in the bluntest way
possible: as "material basis" or "substratum" for some observed, higher-order
phenomenon (in our case, communication).

## Motion Blur

At this point it appears that the whole matter of digital representation rests
on arbitrary and contingent assumptions. If literature is already a digital
and discrete medium, why should it bother us when it is otherwise digitized?
So what if the letter, already an atomic indivisible unit (at least in Latin
script) is further broken down into pixels, the smallest indivisible units on
the screen? Just as one learns to translate the arbitrary shapes of the
alphabet into distinct sounds one can learn to translate arbitrary digits into
letters and back into sounds and thoughts. That is not to say that *all*
aspects of the computed sign are completely independent of sensory constraint.
Humans cannot perceive the ultraviolet spectrum, for example. Nor would it be
practical to create books so heavy as to prevent readers from turning the
pages. The medium is "tuned" if you will to average human capabilities.
Sensory constraints do determine the shape of the message to some reasonable
extent. Yet other techniques of apprehension are socially constructed. Thus
although all opera is in the human-audible frequency range, acculturation to
opera listening helps greatly in its enjoyment. Some aspects of opera
appreciation are learned (like knowing the plot) where others are determined
(like the ability to hear sounds).

We began the discussion by forming some intuitions about the nature of digital
representation. And right away, we saw that such intuitions are at best
conflicted, even when invoked by professional critics. Initially, it seemed
that the intrinsic properties of media, like the "continuous" cursive script
or the "discrete" perforations of the ticker tape, determine the techniques of
apprehension. But under closer examination, the technologies involved resist
easy categorization. We begin to notice that language is already digital, in
many senses of the word, for example. And that human perception itself is
neither purely discrete nor purely continuous phenomenon. A case study of the
so-called "soap opera effect" will help us test such intuitions against a
detailed microanalysis of the screen.

Starting in 2010, modern televisions began shipping with a feature called
"Motion-Compensated Frame Interpolation" (MCFI). The technology causes some
viewers to report what has been dubbed as the "soap opera effect." Everything
looks cheap to a viewer experiencing the soap opera effect. Even the familiar,
critically acclaimed blockbuster featuring top acting talent and expensive
camera work looks unnatural, like it produced on home video. I am quite
susceptible to this phenomenon. I can tell when MCFI is in effect right away
when watching something on someone else's television. When under the effect,
the dynamics of the shot look somehow fake. The actors, even in films that
I've seen and love, appear to be acting. I no longer believe in their
characters as real people. I notice their makeup and their props and I just
know they are faking it. The sensation is akin to watching bad silent cinema.
The style of acting seems forced and "over the top." One cannot imagine people
took *that* sort of thing seriously. The soap opera effect similarly makes
relics of contemporary cinema.

The technology behind MCFI was developed in response to motion blur particular
to flat-panel liquid crystal displays (LCDs). LCDs work by passing light
through a liquid crystal medium, sandwiched between two polarized light
filters and rotated at 90 degrees to each other. As light enters through one
side, it twists following the slightly curved molecular structure of the
crystal, allowing the beam to rotate and to pass through both filters. The
structure unwinds when it receives an electrical current, effectively blocking
the light from passing through the medium. The gates close, so to speak, as
the second filter begins to block the light from exiting. By these means, a
series of small, pinhole-like pixels can be turned on and off to create
shapes, letters, and images on the screen.[^ln3-mishima]

[^ln3-mishima]: See @mishima_novel_2004.

![Liquid crystal in phase transition between polarizers. Schlieren texture
characteristic nematic phase to the left, and circular focal conic domains in
the smectic phase to the right. Image licensed under CC-BY-SA 3.0
[@polimerek_smectic_2004].](images/liquid.jpg)

In addition to filtering light, modern displays also flicker at a precisely
calibrated rate. What we observe as a static image on the screen, is in
reality a highly dynamic projection. Traditional film projectors advance from
one frame to the next at a rate of 24 times each second to match the rate at
which the film is captured by traditional film cameras. The film camera's
shutter moves up and down 24 times per second, capturing a static snapshot at
each turn. The projector's light flickers two to three times per frame, giving
the projector a "refresh rate" of 48‚Äì72 cycles per second, or Hertz (Hz),
which produces the effect of continuous motion. Without this strobing effect,
under continuous light, the succession of frames moving past the light would
appear as a blurry streak of undifferentiated images.

An image persists in the human visual field for about 16 milliseconds after
cessation of a stimulus, giving humans the temporal resolution of around 60
images per second. Consequently, an average person begins to reach the state
of "critical flicker fusion," where the strobe light becomes unnoticeable at
refresh rates equal or higher than 60Hz. At the limits of flicker fusion, the
image begins to persist through the gaps between frames, creating the
appearance of continuous motion [@efron_conservation_1973;
@coltheart_iconic_1980; @brannan_applications_1992]. Below the threshold of
flicker fusion the viewer would begin noticing the strobing effect, which
would make the viewing difficult. A liquid crystal display (LCD) mimics the
action of the analog projector by refreshing the screen at intervals between
60 and 120Hz. This happens even when the image is wholly static, as when
writing digitally or reading an electronic book.

To complicate matters, human vision is more sensitive to rapid motion at the
periphery of vision, in a mechanism likely evolved to provide swift response
to predator attack [@burr_temporal_1981; @didyk_perceptually-motivated_2010].
As humans move closer to their screens (when sitting in front of a computer
monitor, fore example), more of the image enters the field of peripheral
vision, making the viewer more sensitive to screen flicker. When sitting close
to the screen, the flicker can become more noticeable because more of moving
image enters the sensitive area of peripheral vision more adept at perceiving
rapid movement.

Furthermore, being closer to the screen increases the angular velocity of any
depicted moving object. When viewed from afar, the movement of several inches
on the screen corresponds to a change in the sight angle of several degrees,
and likely a few millimeters of iris movement. When viewed up close, the same
several inches on the screen represent a much larger angle, forcing the iris
to move further laterally.

The human visual system is particularly adapt at tracking smooth, horizontal
movement, cognitively anticipating the perceived trajectory of a moving
object, while stabilizing the retinal image and keeping it at the center of
the fovea in what is called "smooth pursuit" lateral eye movement
[@rottach_comparison_1996; @purves_types_2001;
@didyk_perceptually-motivated_2010]. To put it simply, we are good at tracking
things that move horizontally, as when observing an antelope running across
the steppe. Even though our brain cannot capture such movement smoothly, it
fills in the gaps to give the illusion of smooth lateral movement. This makes
humans good at anticipating the trajectory of laterally moving objects. But
beyond some threshold, and particularly when things move rapidly up and down,
the motion begins to appear jerky. Think of it as tracking a fly, which
appears to skip from one place to another.

The "sample and hold" nature of the LCD display frustrates the cognitive
assumption of smooth movement. The brain attempts to anticipate the trajectory
of moving objects on screen assuming that the object is moving smoothly. But
the object's anticipated location does not always correspond to its actual
trajectory on the screen. Because of flicker, the movement is actually
jerky---it is missing some frames, if you will. The moving object appears at
discrete stationary locations punctuated by gaps in on-screen movement. This
mismatch between what is expected and what is perceived appears to the eye as
blur. Shapes become fuzzy in motion [@klompenhouwer_motion_2004;
@har-noy_lcd_2008]. To complicate matters further, the on-off phase
transitions of the liquid crystal medium are not instantaneous. The individual
pixel "fades" instead of vanishing at once, leaving a physical (and not merely
a perceptual) trail of not-quite transitioned pixels in the wake of object
movement [@kurita_moving_2001; @pan_lcd_2005]. Digital television is not so
digital after all.

To put all of these factors together: we observe film shot at 24 frames per
second on LCD screens that redraw the screen at 60-120 times per second. The
disparity between the low sampling rate of traditional film and high sampling
rate of modern monitors has unintended side effects when coupled to human
perceptual apparatus, evolved to perceive motion in a particular way. The
liquid crystal does not perfectly transition in a binary way as one would
expect. To make matters worse we increasingly watch television on small
hand-held devices, close to our field of vision. The combination of these
factors made early LCD displays unsuitable for home entertainment.

To compensate for motion blur, LCD manufacturers introduced Motion-Compensated
Frame Interpolation (MCFI), by which the television itself inserts extra
computed frames in between the original stock footage. The extra frames
should, in theory, make the motion appear more natural, filling in the missing
gaps that confuse the brain. Unfortunately for the viewer, the effectively
higher sample rates carry a major unintended side effect. Most viewers
associate sampling rates of 40Hz and above with daytime soap operas, which
were, for a time, shot on lower quality (but more modern) video equipment as
opposed to expensive legacy film equipment still in use by the big-budget film
industry. Film is expensive because film cameras work by fixing the image onto
the medium through a photochemical process. Like traditional film photography,
raw footage must be developed and processed properly before it can be used for
editing, playback, and distribution. Video and more modern, digital recorders,
by contrast, transform light into fluctuations of the magnetic field, storing
the results on magnetic tape or solid state "floating gate" storage. The
transducer (tape head) reads and writes directly from and to tape, making
magnetic storage significantly more compact and less expensive than film, as
it does not require chemical processing for playback
[@edgerton_columbia_2009].

Crucially for our story, video recorders operate at 60 frames per second, a
recording resolution that together with the distinctive video color profile
and audio aberration signatures give rise to what viewers perceive as that
"cheap video" "soap opera" look. By inserting extra frames into the moving
image, modern televisions in effect alter the apparently expensive, slow
format to match its faster, cheaper video equivalent. The net improvement in
sampling degrades the perceived quality of the original. The motion may be
smoother, but it begins to looks "unnatural." It gives the eye too much
detail. Minutiae of costume and makeup become much more readily apparent,
breaking the spell of acting and dissolving the fourth wall.[^ln3-wall]

[^ln3-wall]: It would be interesting to try to create the reverse effect by
reducing the fidelity of a "cheap" soap opera video feed to 24 frames per
second.

The soap opera effect suggests a few questions for the media scholar.

First, it challenges the easy equivalence between "digital" and "discrete"
properties of the medium so often mentioned in the critical literature.
Another mechanism must be in play here, since, according to accepted
intuition, film (the more discrete format of representation) is the one that
more closely approaches the analog (continuous) nature of observed phenomenon.
Despite being the more fragmentary medium, film is seen as the more analog
format than video. Under closer examination, film, usually discussed in the
context of analog formats, appears to be (in some aspects, as we will explore
in a later theoretical discussion) more digital than digital video,
particularly if "digital" is taken to mean "discrete" and "differentiated."
The incongruity between blueprint and intuition points to a confusion in the
common terms. Since the screen plays a key part in the reception of all
"digital" media, film and text, we must carefully peel apart the layers of the
visible image to reveal the mechanics of projection.

Second, it seems that the very material properties involved in our
understanding of "digital" and "analog" formats are also implicated in
higher-level functions of aesthetic judgment. Perception of quality in a given
recorded performance drifts with the vagrancies of encoding. "Good acting"
inexplicably falls apart with the introduction of extra frames, in our
example. This should worry the critic unfamiliar with the artifacts of digital
conversion. Even upon our cursory examination of the soap opera effect, we
found sensory glitches and distortions that rise in the complex interactions
between organ and device. The very nature of the moving image in fact exploits
one such cognitive glitch to produce the illusion of smooth movement.

Finally, where the literature often places "artificial" digital discreteness
in opposition to "natural" analog continuity, a thick description of innate
human perceptual apparatus reveals a complex patchwork of fragmentary
cognitive mechanisms, already to an extent digital and discrete in their
operation. At some level of analysis, gaps in the encoding format relate to
gaps in human visual processing. Neither can be said to represent reality with
perfect fidelity. Instead, brains and cameras stitch landscapes together from
an unevenly sampled landscape of variegated visual topographies, achieving a
measure of arbitrary synchronicity between human and machine.

The conversation around around all things digital further often conflates the
discrete nature of digital representation with human debasement, following the
logic by which the perceived material impoverishment in one sphere leads to
the implied spiritual impoverishment in the other. The sentiment is everywhere
in the popular press, having deep intellectual roots in the history of
thinking about technology.  Philosophers of technology from Heidegger to
Kittler advance a powerful "hermeneutics of suspicion" towards mechanization,
digitization, and the subsequent computability of human experience. To take
that tradition seriously is to direct hermeneutic suspicion to aspects of
digital being that have meaningful socio-political consequences. If, as the
case of motion blur suggests, human experience is already and always "born
digital," that is, discrete and differentiated throughout, we must find ways
of advancing critique along theoretical distinctions that better capture the
instrumental reality of media practice. Nostalgia for "analog" oneness and
continuity should itself fall under the critical gaze, examined alongside
media marketing slogans advertising gapless playback and lossless file
formats. To long for the analog is to long for the experience of oneness,
which was never there in the first place.

## We Have Always Been Digital

So far, the case studies I built around the Pollak-Virag telegraph and the
liquid crystal display revealed merely the inadequacy of popular intuitions
about digital projection. What does it mean then to "digitize" a book, if
languages---characters, words, sentences, paragraphs, pages---already function
digitally? More broadly, if the digital cannot be reduced to the discrete,
what other properties are being brought forth through digitization? A
long-standing discussion in the fields of aesthetic theory and analytic
philosophy helps articulate 

The difference between discrete and continuous quantities defines the
conversation about digital media.[^ln3-maley] For example, in a popular book
about what a "well-informed person should know about computers," Brian
Kernighan writes about "analog" as something meant to convey "the idea of
values that change smoothly as something else changes" [@kernighan_d_2011,
526]. Much of the world is analog, Kernighan explains. A water tap, a pen, or
a car steering wheel are all examples of analog interfaces. For example, when
riding a bicycle, turning the handlebars one way results in a corresponding
motion of the machine. This motion is smooth. Compare that with the action of a
light switch. A properly functioning light switch takes on two discrete states
only: on or off. A range of pressure applied to the switch does not correspond
to any mechanical action of the lever. But once a certain threshold is reached,
the switch "flips" to change states. "Digital systems deal with discrete
values," Kernighan writes. The switch contains a limited number of state
possibilities (2), where the bicycle handlebars could be rotated in an infinite
number of minutely differing gradations.

The philosopher Nelson Goodman (responsible for bringing the digital
conversation into the realm of aesthetic theory in the analytic tradition)
makes a further distinction in maintaining that digital systems must be more
than merely "discontinuous," but also "differentiated throughout." By contrast,
analog systems are "dense" and "undifferentiated to the extreme"
[@goodman_languages_1968, 159-164]. Written language and music notation, by
this definition, are digital systems par excellence, having the property of
reducing the undifferentiated, analog input (human thought) into discrete
semantic units (text or musical notation).[^ln3-goodman] Following Goodman's
logic one can reasonably maintain that the art of painting, unlike music or
language, cannot be reduced to the production of discrete semantic units, and
would be more of an analog system under the proposed definitions. In this
light, the language of cubist painting, which reconstructs shape into its
modular atomic components, can be viewed as an attempt to move painting from an
analog to a digital art form. The digital image, reduced to pixels of uniform
shape and size, takes the logic of cubism to its conclusion.

An interesting corollary to the continuous property of analog systems is our
inability to duplicate their states exactly. I can approximate the pressure
someone else puts on their bicycle handlebars with some arbitrary measure of
precision that can never reach perfect reproducibility. This means also that
while more digital art forms like literature are, in some sense, perfectly
reproducible, analog forms, like painting, are not. Following a similar chain
of reasoning, the late great American philosopher John Haugeland amends
Goodman's foundational definitions of digital representation to include
"flawless copying and preservation." This property further has the effect of
freeing digital representation from its medium. A Rembrandt is bound to its
canvas in a way that Shakespeare's *Hamlet* is not. Digital systems are media
independent. *Hamlet* can be reproduced on paper or stone, in Morse code, or
bound in liquid crystal, and still be *Hamlet* in some natural understanding of
the work. To the definition of Goodman's digital systems, Haugeland therefore
adds the notion of "feasible procedures" that can lead to "positive and
reliable" processes for reading and writing digital tokens
[@haugeland_analog_1981, 213-225]. In the case of the soap opera effect, we may
think of film as something like an "irreproducible series of paintings" and of
video as "perfectly copyable magnetic facsimiles." (This would at least restore
film to the conventional understanding of analog formats.)

Writing more than a quarter of a century later, Matthew Katz offers two further
important addenda to the discussion between Goodman and Haugeland. First, Katz
maintains that Goodman's notions of discreteness and differentiation properly
affect the format and not the medium of representation. Second, he maintains
that the distinction between digital and analog formats could sometimes relate
to the person involved, and not on the medium itself.  To illustrate these two
amendments, Katz gives the example of an approximate measuring system that uses
a supply of marbles in a large beaker.  The unit of measurement could be
something like a "number of handfuls." Even though marbles are a perfectly
discrete medium, the system is analog because no convention is established to
reproduce a "handful" with any sense of precision. My two handfuls will be
different from another's. A corollary to the distinction between medium and
format, then, lies in the user's ability to perceive quantities.  The reader
(viewer, listener) matters. Were humans endowed with the magical ability to
perceive the exact number of water molecules in a beaker, previously analog
systems (like unmarked beakers) would in effect become digital (under the
expanded definition). Similarly, were all humans endowed with hands of a
definite size and volume, "handfuls" would also be counted as discrete and
therefore digital quantities. From similar thought experiments Katz concludes
that the physical, perceptual, and cognitive capabilities of the "user"
(reader, audience, perceiver) affect the ontological status of the system
[@katz_analog_2008].

The movement from medium to user radically destabilizes Goodman's original
insight. Where Goodman begins with defining digitality in terms of physical
properties (divisible, or indivisible, dense, or continuous), Katz ends with it
as format imposed on matter from without. Undifferentiated matter like cake is
only analog until someone cuts it into pieces. Furthermore, the ontological
status of cake changes depending on the person doing the cutting. The cake is
more digital, in a sense, for someone armed with a laser cutter and a
microscope.  Similarly, painting can be thought of as a perfectly digital art
if we consider it at the scale of art gallery as a series of discrete,
replaceable, and reproducible frames(!) of canvas.[^ln3-art] What does it mean
to digitize text then when text is already, by some definitions, a digital
format?

These conundrums reveal a problem in the very formulation of the question: What
*is* digital representation? Under examination, properties related to the
digital--analog distinction cease constituting an ontological category. Rather
than a state of being, they indicate a systematic imposition of structure. The
more appropriate question then is: What *makes* for digital representation?

From the instrumental point of view, to make something digital is to liberate
representation from its medium. To digitize means also to allow for "copying
and preservation," actions that, when taken outside of their philosophic
context acquire an immediate practical implication (for a librarian, for
example). That is not to say that digitization makes thought wholly ephemeral
or immaterial; rather, that it allows for the continual advancement and
transmediation of thought---the ability to change specific material contexts as
afforded by the very property of "media independence." Digitization, in that
sense, is a necessary prerequisite for culture (in the common sense of
"collective intellectual achievement"). Without digital portability, all
representation (art and knowledge) attaches itself irrecoverably to
untranslatable and irreproducible conditions of its material production.

The digital being of representation, initially seen as a property of the
medium, arises then as a political property regulating the very transmission of
thought. Text on paper or screen remains digital only in so far as the medium
is not fixed. Truly digital text can be copied and placed into other hands and
minds, feasibly and reliably. The possibility of these procedures is what
ultimately gives representation its digital form. A document restricted or
classified in any way loses some of the necessary preconditions for being
digital. This also means that technologies like "digital rights management"
(DRM), which work to fix representation into a specific medium, transform
digital content back into its media-dependent, irreproducible, and analog
forms. Another way to put it would be to say that on "protected" devices (like
proprietary e-book readers) the content is digital for some users and analog
for those without permissions to copy, share, and transform.

The word, already a discrete quantity, comes into digital being as form when
coupled loosely to its material contexts. Ontologically, text is by nature a
digital format: first because it represents discrete units of information about
the world, and second, because it allows for some measure of "flawless copying
and preservation." Copying and preservation constitute the logic compelling the
historical advancement of writing. But, also note that "flawless copying and
preservation" are in themselves contingent (not fully determined) properties of
writing. For example, imagine a world in which ideas forever "adhere" to their
brain-bound media.[^ln3-brain] Imagine also a society that positively prohibits the
transmediation of thought, on paper or between brain cells. Envision extreme
forms of thought control that restrict the very basics of speech and literacy,
prohibiting the manufacture of pens, paper, computers, photocopiers, voice
recorders, and word processors. Such prohibitions would amount to total
censorship. A radically analog society would also be wholly mute.

Understanding digitality as a format imposed onto matter, a format that
facilitates transmediation, recasts the history of computing as something other
than simple "mathesis," the idea that computation reduces the world into more
discrete, and therefore computable, elements. That idea would be true if the
computer was simply a glorified calculator. But computers are not just that: in
practice, they reveal themselves as self-amending machines for universal
transmediation (not limited to numbers)---machines that, depending on the
user's acuity and dispensation to perceive text (and all information, really)
as deep structure, separate readers into those for whom texts exist as fixed
analog given, and those for whom they function as truly digital media, capable
of transformation affecting further texts, people, and machines. To paraphrase
a post-structuralist insight, the process of digital interpretation is in
itself a type of creativity, forever advancing rather than apprehending the
lateral movement of thought.

[^ln3-brain]: At the physical level, the process of textual remediation begins
at the brain, as when thoughts are initially transcribed onto paper.

[^ln3-art]: "Replaceable" and "reproducible" as in the sense that an art
gallery perseveres through the continual loss and rearrangement of its
constituent art works.

[^ln3-maley]: See for example @maley_analog_2011: "The received view is that
analog representations vary smoothly, while digital representations vary in
stepwise manner. In other words, 'digital' is synonymous with 'discrete,' while
'analog' is synonymous with 'continuous.'" See also @kittler_there_1995,
"Confronted as they are with a continuous environment of weather, waves, and
wars, digital computers can cope with this real number-avalanche only by adding
element to element."

[^ln3-goodman]: Goodman differentiates between "syntactic" and "semantic"
density. Some notational systems like writing and the decimal system are,
according to Goodman, "syntactically differentiated but semantically dense."
The key distinction for him seems to be a "limit on the length of message," by
which I think he means something related to infinite divisibility. The decimal
system as a whole can continue to approach a quantity indefinitely, reaching an
arbitrary point of precision. The computer limits decimal precision to some
arbitrary "depth" of approximation, making it semantically discrete. I find
this part of the argument unconvincing.

## What Is It Like to Be a Telegraph

I am tempted to believe, like others have before me, that I am on my way to
enacting something like "machine phenomenology" or "systems phenomenology" in a
system which encompasses people, texts, techniques, and technologies. In such
cases, astute readers often reach for Jakob von Uexk√ºll's *A Foray into the
Worlds of Animals and Humans*, to borrow from his notion of perceptual worlds
(umwelten).[^ln3-umwelten] In his forays, Uexk√ºll imagines a multitude of alien
ways of seeing the world, from that of a sea urchin to those of a pea weevil
and the ichneumon wasp. For Uexk√ºll, the task of the biologist is not to
encounter such living things as unfamiliar "machines" in the human world, but,
rather, to occupy the alien life form as another subject. The tick should not
be looked at as yet another machine, Uexk√ºll writes, but as an "operator"
[@uexkull_foray_2010, 44-53]. Consequent to this point of view is Uexk√ºll's
insistence on the subjectivity of perceptual experience. The tick carries with
it its own sense of time and space, which the biologist recovers through the
description of its perceptual apparatus (What can this organism perceive?) and
therefore by reconstructing its projected world view (What does a stimulus mean
for this organism?). In this way, the subject establishes what Uexk√ºll calls a
"circuit of meaning." The canopy of an oak tree, for example, acts in unison
with material properties of rain to capture and distribute liquid down to the
roots of the tree. Capturing and distributing liquid to the roots constitutes,
in that sense, the "meaning" of the oak--rain circuit. It is a peculiar notion
of "meaning" to be sure, but for Uexk√ºll it is enough to maintain that meaning
arises out of the subject's interaction with its environment. The subject and
object are brought into what Uexk√ºll calls harmony:

> If the flower were not bee-like
> If the bee were not flower-like
> The harmony would never succeed [@uexkull_foray_2010, 198].

Similarly, the pea and the pea weevil achieve harmony through "meaning
transfer" between the pea and the weevil larvae, which allows the larvae to
prepare an escape hatch through vegetative matter in advance of its pupation
[@uexkull_foray_2010, 161].

[^ln3-umwelten]: See for example @agamben_open_2003, 39-49; @hayles_print_2004,
16-17.

The literature of post-humanism privileges these moments of alien subjectivity
because they destabilize an anthropocentric view of the world. What gets lost
in the shifting of perspectives is the apparent contradiction at the very core
of what the writer Dorion Sagan (rightly) calls "Gaia sciences"
[@uexkull_foray_2010, 12], the idea ascendant in diverse fields from literary
studies to information theory and free-market economics, relegating meaning
creation from the level of the subject to the level of complex system.
Paradoxically, because Uexk√ºll's model of communication makes meaning available
only at the system level ("oak plus rain" or "bee plus flower"), it is never
available to the subject itself (bees or flowers). The quest for alien
semiotics leads only to, in Uexk√ºll's own words, "mute interaction"
[@uexkull_foray_2010, 148], meaningful only from some vantage point outside of
the system. The forest always "understands" more than the tree, the planet more
than the forest, and so on, in a regression that can only conclude with
whole-universe monism: the One.

In his essay on the subjective experience of bats, Thomas Nagel concludes that
there must be something about the experience of a bat *for* a bat
[@nagel_what_1974, 439] that is not fully accessible to human description. The
attempt to describe things in-themselves for-themselves, in that light, seems
like yet further human hubris. Accepting the meta-human "systems" view of
meaning formation would mean also to acknowledge the limits of the human to
comment on the proceedings---lest the organ speak for the organism. And to
encounter the bat (a dog, a tree, a machine) from the perspective of the human
is to respect and to retain a measure of the other's ineffable alienness. There
is a quiet humanism in Nagel's suggestion that we should confine our remarks to
objective phenomenology, not dependent on the self-deceiving acts of the
imagination [@nagel_what_1974, 449]. After all, one can never truly become a
bat or a tick.  We can only imagine what it is like to be a bat *for* a human.
"Certainly it appears unlikely," Nagel writes, "that we will get closer to the
real nature of human experience by leaving behind the particularity of our
human point of view and striving for a description in terms accessible to
beings that could not imagine what it was like to be us" [@nagel_what_1974,
444]. Nagel suggests: "Though presumably it would not capture
everything, its goal would be to describe, at least in part, the subjective
character of experiences in a form comprehensible to beings incapable of having
those experiences" [@nagel_what_1974, 449].

I do not know what a truly objective phenomenology would look like, but I would
like to think that it would lie, at least in part, in the underlying material
conditions of perceptual media. I am able to advance an equitable description
of the system from the only perspective available to me. These blueprints and
diagrams are all we have to understand the ways in which the system affects its
constituents. Paying attention to the details of the schematics is the only way
to "dig" ourselves into something like an alien phenomenology. As the
humanities move in search of the digital, I find that they need to regain a
sense of the human. No perspective is available otherwise from which to enact
analysis or critique. Once recovered, that Archimedean point of leverage can
serve as a starting point for the work of de-naturalizing comfortable (if
calcified) notions of the digital. It is in this de-familiarization (in a sense
used by Viktor Shklovsky and Svetlana Boym) of the human that I see Uexk√ºll's
contribution to the study of media phenomenology. The human disappears from
view not by some inevitable property of technological progress, but through
automation of experience. In refracting ourselves through the gaze of the
technological other we see the human world anew.

From this perspective, electricity---the "language" of wires---is not a media
format intended for human consumption. One could learn to understand telegraph
intercourse through electrocution, by applying the wire directly to the skin.
Direct brain--computer interfaces promise to do more or less exactly that and
are common enough today to be turned into a toy.[^ln3-mindflex] The early
efforts in this space implanted electrodes into the brain directly to capture
single-neuron activity, or relied on imprecise "noisy" electroencephalographic
(EEG) scalp activity. In 2004 a team of scientists developed a way of
controlling "a one-dimensional computer cursor rapidly and accurately" using
electrocorticographic (ECoG) activity recorded from the surface of the brain
[@leuthardt_braincomputer_2004; @miller_spectral_2007]. And in 2015, a
quadriplegic woman piloted an F-35 Joint Strike Fighter using her brain in a
simulation developed by the University of Pittsburgh's Human Engineering
Research Laboratories in collaboration with the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) [@collinger_collaborative_2014; @prabhakar_how_2015].
Advances in brain--computer interfaces suggest also the not-all-too-distant
possibility of computer--brain interfaces (in a reversal of the direction),
completing the loop between human and machine. This may also imply the
possibility of communicating brain-states directly, without the mediation of
text or sound. However futuristic that possibility may seem to us today, it is
merely a small evolutionary step in a long history of brain-to-brain
interfaces, already mediated by paper, ink, code, and silicon. The digital
world of paper and ink holds no less magic.

I return, then, to the subject of time, found throughout in the background of
this chapter. The popular imagination of digital machines belies a deep sense
of anxiety about the rhythm of the system as a whole, in which humans play only
a small part (as bug operators, users, or receivers). Telegraphs and
subsequently computers force an atomization of experience into discrete bits,
along with the opposite movement toward continuity fluid and rapid enough as to
move beyond the boundaries of human perception. Attention to the material
conditions of removable storage media reveals a delicate negotiation of
synchronicity between human and machine time, in a complex chain of encoding
and re-mediation that connects differing and incongruent perceptual apparatus.
Under these conditions, it would be a mistake to conflate digital and discrete,
just as it would be a mistake to reduce the human to the continuous.[^ln3-cont]
Homeostasis is found at some arbitrary point, contingently connected to human
biology and to current technological capability. The question of "What
constitutes a moment?" when watching television or reading a book, can become
then, "What *should* constitute a moment?" For the tick lying in wait for its
next warm meal, a moment can last for decades (Uexk√ºll reports up to 18
years). "Time, which frames all events," Uexk√ºll writes, "seemed to us to be
the only objectively consistent factor [‚Ä¶], but now we see that the subject
controls the time of its environment" [@uexkull_foray_2010, 52]. The
computational environment before us constitutes the grounds for all
higher-level textual activity, from record keeping to poetry and software
development. From the textual grounds of human--machine interaction it then
becomes possible to derive poetics, in the sense of a study and an art of
creating one's own time: taking control of prosody, rhythm, meter, and cadence.

[^ln3-ndc]: Also known as the "single current" or "single Morse" system.

[^ln3-murray]: The Australian Donald Murray improved on the Baudot system to
minimize the amount of "designed to punch as few holes as possible," allotting
fewer perforations to common English letters (@murray_setting_1905, 567).

[^ln3-zero]: Twenty-eight measures to indicate the numerical "figure space" and
26 to indicate double quotes (which shared the encoding length with the letter
"z").

[^ln3-current]: ITA-2 could also be adopted to work with "double current"
devices, in which case 0 would represent "negative current" and 1 "positive
current" [@itu_telegraph_1932, 36].

[^ln3-kittler]: This along with the ominous "laying of cables" that concludes
Friedrich Kittler's *Gramophone, Film, Typewriter*.

[^ln3-multi]: Technical literature makes a distinction between space- and
frequency- division multiplexing. On some level, space-division multiplexing
simply involves the splitting of a signal into multiple physical channels
(wires). Frequency-division better "fills" the space of a single channel.

[^ln3-tele]: See for example @angell_pro_2009, 233:  "The telegraph is a
digital device sending only high and low pulses through the wire;"
@jepsen_my_2001, 195: "The telegraph was a digital device that used dots and
dashes in a manner similar to the ones and zeroes of digital logic;"
@comer_internet_2006, 32: "The telegraph is a digital device because instead of
sending a continuous signal that is an exact analog of the input, the telegraph
clicks to send the individual characters."

[^ln3-mindflex]: The American toy giant Mattel makes a game called "Mindflex."
The Frequently Asked Questions page includes the following prompt: "Have you
ever dreamed of moving an object with the power of your mind? Mindflex Duel‚Ñ¢
makes that dream a reality! Utilizing advanced Mindflex Duel‚Ñ¢ technology, the
wireless headset reads your brainwave activity. Concentrate...and the ball
rises on a cushion of air! Relax...and the ball descends. It's literally mind
over matter!" (@mindflex_mindflex:_2015)

[^ln3-cont]: Gregory Hickok, a prominent cognitive scientists working out of
University of California, Irvine writes: "The brain samples the world in
rhythmic pulses, perhaps even discrete time chunks, much like the individual
frames of a movie. From the brain's perspective, experience is not continuous
but quantized [...] This is not to say that the brain dances to its own beat,
dragging perception along for the ride. In fact, it seems to work the other way
around: Rhythms in the environment, such as those in music or speech, can draw
neural oscillations into their tempo, effectively synchronizing the brain's
rhythms with those of the world around us" [@hickok_its_2015]. His study on the
topic is forthcoming in *Psychological Science* in 2015.

John Eberhard from the Institute of Applied Technology, National Bureau of
Standards speaking in 1967 at the Electronic Composition in Printing symposium
at Gaithersburg Laboratories.

@technology_electronic_1968, 1

I happen to be a humanist among the physical scientists here at the National
Bureau of Standards. Begins with a quote from Marshall McLuhan. "He who does
his work like a machine, grows a heart like a machine in his breast, and he who
carries a heart of the machine in his breast losses his simplicity. He who has
lost his simplicity, becomes unsure of the strivings of his soul."

"It is a long way from standards like the alphabet to standards like privacy
with the respect to the use of computers."

"We are concerned not only with nuts and bolts and screw threads or with the
standards related to the phenomena of matter and materials. We are becoming
increasingly concerned about man and about how man becomes a part of this
measuring system" [2].

Heidegger would be good here.

Media

[^ln3-siegert]: Siegert takes the Virag as an "apocryphal emblem" of a
"systematic logic in the dominant cultural technique," representative of the
"order of digital signals" [@siegert_cacography_2011, 41]. Although not
concerned with the history or philosophy of digital media explicitly, Siegert
suggests that the writing telegraph symbolizes the cleansing of "the noise of
all graphic form." His theory of cultural techniques instead creates "an
awareness for the plenitude of a world of as yet undistinguished things, that,
as an inexhaustible reservoir of possibilities, remain the basic point of
reference for every type of culture" [@siegert_cacography_2011, 35].

[^ln3-virag]: The Pollak-Virag device also proposed an "electromagnetic
vibrator" coupled to a recording "mirror-galvanometer." The authors further
specify for "the vibrator on the receiving instrument [to] vibrate in harmony
with these impulses, vibrating in one direction or the other, according to
their sign and to an extent depending on their intensity" [@pollak_means_1900].

[^ln3-dervish]: One could make more of the Dervish being used here as a
negative example, in an instance of colonial gaze. But Murray himself was an
empire outsider, born in the small, remote town of Invercargill, New Zealand (a
town that also happens to be one of the southern-most cities in world). "I am a
child of the Southern Cross," he writes in *Philosophy of Power*, "and I have
no preordained respect for geniuses born under the Northern constellations" [@murray_philosophy_1939, 51].

[^ln3-swedenborg]: See @swedenborg_treatise_1778, regarding the "gross error of
those who assert the materiality of the soul, affirming it to be homogeneous,
and continuous with the body; whereas it is heterogeneous, and discrete" (24).
Swedenborg gives the neoplatonic, monistic articulation of the matter to the
angels, in the "Angelic Idea of Creation," writing "The question was asked,
'Whence, then, is hell?' They said, 'From man's freedom, without which a man
would not be a man,' because man, from that freedom, broke the continuity in
himself; and this being broken, separation took place; and the continuity,
which was in him from creation, became like a chain, or a piece of linked
work, which falls to pieces when the hooks above are broken or torn out, and
then hangs down from small threads. Separation or rupture was brought about,
and is brought about, by the denial of God" [@swedenborg_apocalypse_1901, 290].

[^ln3-golumbia]: See @golumbia_cultural_2009: "Following a line of criticism
that extends at least as farm back as Kant [...] (loc. 63)." Paraphrasing
@deleuze_postscript_1992, Golumbia writes "To submit a phenomenon to
computation is to striate otherwise-smooth details, among details, to push
upwards towards the sovereign, to make only high-level control available to
the user and then only those aspects of control that are deemed appropriate to
the sovereign (loc. 159)." To get to the bottom of the contemporary unease
with digitization, we will first examine some of the material contexts that
support the propagation of digital media. We will then look at a few formal,
theoretical attempts to describe the particularity of digital representation.
Finally, we will have the chance to examine the specifics by which digital
media necessitates a change in the "mode" of specifically digital
apprehension.

[^ln3-digital]: For a summary of digital physics and metaphysics see
@steinhart_digital_1998 and @floridi_against_2009.

[^ln3-bergsonism]: On the rather complex topic of discrete vs. continuous
multiplicities in Bergsonian thought see also @james_pluralistic_1909 and
@deleuze_bergsonism_1990.

## Medium not the Message (attunement)

By "encoding," I mean a "controlled system of representation." Representation
in its unrestrained form (as in "pictorial representation") differs from
"encoding" in the size of its vocabulary. Painting and other forms of
uninhibited representational conventions are limitless in their expressive
possibility. The "language" of painting is infinite, in other words. Encoding,
by contrast, reduces the universe of possibilities to a limited set of salient
"codes," like the alphabet. These codes have a formal grammar and rules of
composition. Although the expressive potential of written language is
limitless, in some combinatorial sense of the word, language and other codes
can "break," that is, be reduced to nonsense, in a way that painting cannot. A
telegraph of the single-Morse type accepts alpha-numeric characters at first
and then translates them into a system of signals, expressed in time intervals
(between the synchronization tone and the activation of the key).

It becomes clear from the description of early telegraph encoding systems that
transcoding and transmediation relate to each other somehow. On one hand, all
changes between encoding systems necessitate material phase transition, if not
from one type of medium into another (from paper to magnetic storage, for
example), then from one specific material context into another (as when one
merely translates from French into English on the same piece of paper).
Transmediation, on the other hand, may or may not involve a change in encoding
formats, although it frequently does, as when language on paper is transformed
into the pulsations of the electrical signal in Morse code. In reading and
playing music, a musician furthermore transforms musical notation---a
controlled, paper-bound vocabulary---into sound representation, the movement of
molecules unlimited in its expressive potential.
What matters is that the medium is largely independent from the type of
information stored on it, and this contrary to Marshall McLuhan infamous "the
medium is the message" dictum.15 The world itself "medium" is misleading in
this context. We could for example say that paint is the medium of painting.
But what about the photograph of a painting? Or its digital reproduction? The
situation is even more confusing when we begin thinking about music, for
example. What is the medium for J.S.  Bach's Double Violin Concerto: the
violin or the music sheet which contains the score? We are on yet more
precarious terrain when considering hybrid "media," like film or television
that are comprised of multiple sources and that use multiple modes of
transmission.  The confusion enters the conversation when we conflate the
modality of the information (e.g. music, image, text) with the physical
channel of its transmission (the medium proper). Modality may very well be the
message. Thus, it may be true that when one plays the violin, the music can be
said to express itself in musical terms. But not the violin! I could use a
violin to transmit a picture of an orchestra over a dial-up modem, for
example. This would only involve the question of how to encode the visual
information into a state transmittable by the violin (a primarily auditory
instrument).  The channel of communication‚Äîthe medium proper‚Äîis in fact,
information-agnostic. That is to say that it has no preference about the
message being transmitted (nor can it have a preference for anything at all,
formally speaking‚Äîpreference being a property we ascribe to objects that are
at least animate). We could therefore transmit a sonata by playing a violin,
as sheet-music, on a vinyl disk, recorded on tape, or by using an illegal
peer-to-peer network. In each case, the information transmitted remains more
or less the same, depending on the quality of your violin playing, the
fidelity of your speakers, or the compression ratio of your digital encoding.
It would be wrong too to consider any of these sources as somehow primal, with
others being something like "mere copies" of the original. We could for
example, start by composing music on paper. Alternatively, we could first play
a piece of music and then transcribe it into musical notation. In an extreme
but perfectly plausible case, we could compose by magnetizing a length of
ferrous tape first, and only then play the violin to reproduce what we have
"written." The medium does not know anything about the message. The way in
which we store, access, and retrieve the encoded information is determined by
the medium, however. We are the ones being shaped by the media. I do mean this
rather literally: the stage directions for Krapp's Last Tape would be very
different were Krapp writing a diary, or browsing his online social networking
profile, or if he were to embed a memory chip in his brain that was able to
store and retrieve the same messages from his thirty-nine year-old self as the
tape-recorder. The actor's body would move differently in each of these
cases‚Äîhis senses and his thought would be altered in many subtle ways,
depending on the channel of communication.

The separation between mode and medium allows us to retain a certain clarity of
vision in a rather muddled conversation about "media history." Modalities such
as visual arts, music or literature do not necessarily evolve, in the normative
sense of the word. Yes, it may be true that Filippo Brunelleschi invented the
optical linear perspective in 1425. But the normative evolution of art could
only make sense only against some concrete pragmatic goals, which the aesthetic
realm lacks by definition. Nothing is gained or lost when the fashion changes
from square-toed to pointy-toed shoes, and then back again‚Äîto use an example
that would surely please Mr. Krapp. Neither is "better" or "worse" for the
participants in that sphere of cultural activity. By contrast, the concept of
the medium does contain some sense of normative valuation, also by definition.
That is to say that the medium has a job, which is to facilitate the storage,
the transmission, and the retrieval of information. And there is such a thing
as doing this job better or more efficiently. More is always better in this
case: more storage, faster access, more reliable transmission. When the quality
of the information is not sacrificed, there are no instances were less would be
preferable by anyone with limited time and resources. For example, I would like
to be able to read or write faster. I value both of these activities, but my
time to perform them is limited by my lifespan. Assuming I could gain speed
without any degradation in clarity or comprehension, and barring any
psychological ill effects, the idea of more in this case must be a good onto
itself.


Digitality, as I will argue for the duration of the book, constitutes a part
of the human condition worthy of conservation. But, what I mean by "digital
being" relates to the practice of buying "digital cameras" or to promoting the
"digital humanities" in name only. To perceive what is at stake, we must do
much more to disambiguate the digital cognates: electronic, binary, and
computational.

