---
title: "Plain Text: The Poetics of Human-Computer Interaction"
subtitle: "Chapter 4: Word at Hand"
author: "Dennis Tenen"
style: csl/chicago-note.csl
bibliography: plain-text.bib
toc: true
documentclass: article
cover-image: images/steno.png
header-includes:
- \usepackage{ftnxtra}
- \usepackage{titlesec}
- \newcommand{\sectionbreak}{\clearpage}

---

## Chapter 4: Letter at Hand
`reading, writing, home, media being`

Right away let us dissmiss the common misonception about the origins of the
QWERTY keyboard. It did not gain that arrangement because. It is also not true
that other layout necessarily achieve faster speeds like Dvorak or . This
chapter is about keyboards however. It won't be a totalizing history, as
before. Why so important? Why so not important now?

### Stenography

### Dvorak

### Heidegger

### Extended Cognition
### 5.3 Knowledge at Hand


### 5.4 Ethno-Psychology

In thinking of cognitive structures inside and outside the natural brain-bound
limits of the mind, Nietzsche and Wittgenstein anticipate a late-twentieth
century turn towards "extended" and "situated" cognition in the fields of
psychology, cognitive studies, and most relevantly for this book, in the field
of human-computer interaction (HCI). Donald Norman, a prominent figure in HCI,
traces the concern with what he calls "cognitive artifacts" to the work of the
German physiologist, Willhelm Wundt (1832--1920 who, among other ideas,
pioneered the notion of "folk psychology [@norman_designing_1991, 3]" in the
early 1910s. Wundt himself credits the creation of "folk" or, better yet,
"ethno-" or "cultural psychology (*Völkerpsychologie*) to Moritz Lazarus
(1824--1903) and Heymann Steinthal (1823--99), German--Jewish philosophers and
philologists of an earlier generation, both now for the most part forgotten in
this lineage [@danziger_origins_1983].

In their programmatic 1860 introduction to the first issue of *Journal for
Linguistics and Folk Psychology* (*Zeitschrift für Völkerpsychologie und
Sprachwissenschaft*), Lazarus and Steinthal declare a new discipline of study
which combines "physical" and "mental ehtnology" [@lazarus_einleitende_1860,
1]. Elsewhere, in search of making the Hegelian notion of *Geist* more
concrete, the authors separate the Hegelian spirit into what they call they
call purely "mental elements," like views, convictions, opinions, thoughts and
feelings, and "symbolic embodiments of thought," like art work, documents,
literature, built structures of all kinds, and industrial products. These
"contain the objectified spirit in the narrow sense," as "*Geist* transferred
into an object," which then has the potential to "arouse subjective [mental]
activity" [@lazarus_einige_1865, 53-4].[^ln4-stein] In this way, "the movement
of ideas includes an organic system for the generation of intellectual tools
[*Erzeugung von geistigen Werkzeugen*], which help and reinforce one another"
[@lazarus_einleitende_1860, 18]. In this light, cultural psychology emerges as
a "third science" between natural sciences and history, "mediating" between
universal law and individual human freedom [@lazarus_einleitende_1860, 19]. For
Lazarus and Steinthal, cultural psychology offers something like a "physiology
of human history." In contrast to the prevailing racial and Darwinist
explanations of historical process, which arranged cultures along a
hierarchical evolutionary pyramid (with Western civilization at its
pinnacle),[^ln4-kalmar] the authors view national psychology as a
historically-contingent and neutral interplay between individual mental states
and externalized, common, material representations of spiritual life
[*Darstellung des geistigen Inhaltes*] [@lazarus_einleitende_1860;
@lazarus_einige_1865].

[^ln4-kalmar]: The anthropologist Ivan Kalmar calls this view "ethnocentric
evolutionism" [@kalmar_volkerpsychologie_1987, 680].

In the twenty volumes of the journal's existence, Lazarus and Steinthal wrote
several programmatic pieces similar to the ones quoted above, but, perhaps due
to their marginalized academic status, they rarely had the chance to put the
proposed research program into practice. Their legacy remains in the
articulation of *Völkerpsychologie*, which points to a systematic study of both
the social and the material aspects of shared mental life. Scholars involved in
reconstructing the intellectual legacy of Lazarus and Steinthal usually
emphasize the first of these directions, placing them early within an explicit
lineage of social thought that connects to Georg Simmel, Max Weber, and Martin
Buber on the German side, to the French sociology school of Émile Durkheim and
Marcel Mauss, to the Soviet socio-linguistics of Alexander Veselovsky,
Alexander Potebnja, Mikhail Bakhtin; and to the birth of Anglo-American
anthropology through Bronisła Malinowski and Franz Boaz
[@danziger_origins_1983; @kalmar_volkerpsychologie_1987; @kohnke_four_1990;
@greenwood_volkerpsychologie_1999; @diriwachter_volkerpsychologie_2004].
Remarkably, all of the above mentioned scholars, many of whom started
significant intellectual schools of their own, mention the *Völkerpsychologie*
of Lazarus, Steinthal, and Wundt as an important early influence.

Much more work needs to be done to recover the intellectual legacy of
*Völkerpsychologie*. The Canadian cultural historian and anthropologist Ivan
Kalmar, who was one of the earliest contemporary voices to begin that work,
laments that Lazarus and Steinthal would have been much better remembered by
anthropologists today had they described their research program as a type
anthropology, instead of psychology. Yet he explains also that the authors
explicitly rejected anthropology as too "physiological" and too "climatic" to
provide sufficient grounds for a study of *Volksgeist.* Their explicit aim was
to make the "total of inner experience comprehensible"
[@kalmar_volkerpsychologie_1987, 673-4]. They therefore considered cognates
like "mental ethnology" before settling on *Völkerpsychologie*. Cultural
psychology therefore reflects a concern with both "subjective" and "objective"
life of the spirit, in a mutual dialogue between a person's inner life, as a
sequence of impressions and ideas, and the sum total of "concrete" and
"objectified" or externalized manifestations of that inner life (like documents,
buildings, and commercial products" [@lazarus_einige_1865, 53-55; also quoted
in @kalmar_volkerpsychologie_1987, 679]. This model of culture itself relies on
recursion, by which the common (*das Allgemeine*) and the personal (*das
Persönliche* are throughout intertwined (*durchaus gleichgemischt*)
[@lazarus_einige_1865, 55].

Technology plays an interesting role in this circle of internalizing and
externalizing. Lazarus writes that "tools and machines appear between the
extremes" of "symbolic personifications" (art works and documents) on the one
hand and purely spiritual elements, like beliefs and convictions, on the other.
The Spirit is thereby "objectified" through technology to attain "lasting
efficacy" (*Wirksamkeit*) conditioned through continual "knowledge of use"
(*Kenntniß des Gebrauchs*) [@lazarus_einige_1865, 55].

### 5.5 Vygotsky Circle (+Luria)

### 5.6 Americans

Michael Cole. p118
More than a century later, Donald Norman. James Carroll.

I construct this brief genealogy of
technological skepticism of a particular kind to note that all of the above
example contains within them a bifurcated model, that puts some notion of inner
"natural mind" into an often problematic relationship with technologies of
externalized cognitive augmentation.


### Back to Dvorak

I am trying

### History
### Dvorak
### Stenography
### Heidegger
### Extended Cognition
### Back to Dvorak
I am trying

### Heidegger at hand
### Dvorak

Keyboard
At hand.
Interface
Lori Emmerson

### Extended Cognition

In this concern with the externalized forms of private thought, Lazarus and
Steinthal anticipate not only the turn to collective intelligence in the end of
the ninetieth century (CHECK ON THAT), but to extended cognition at the end
of the twentieth. The so-called sMoscow school of psychology, *Völkerpsychologie* 

note only that the texts quoted above already contain the kernel of the
extended mind hypothesis. Norman, writing in the 1990a traces a direct lineage
between himself and Wundt through the Soviet social-historical schools of the
1920s, as reflected in the works of Leontev, Luria, and Vygotsky--not to the
collective psychology of Alexander Luria, Lev Vygotsky, and Kurt Lewin
translated into English until late 1970s and early 1980s.[^ln4-halbwachs] And
Hutchins and cognitive artifacts by Dan Norman. Hypothesis of extended
cognition. Effect on the study of literature.

The Hypothesis of Extended Cognition (HEC) The hypothesis of extended cognition
(HEC) holds that certain cognitive processes can be viewed as extending beyond
the boundaries of the human body into their physical, social, and symbolic
environments. Andy Clark and David Chalmers suggest an example involving Otto
and Inga: two individuals on their way to an art exhibition. Inga remembers the
location of the museum by memory. Otto suffers from Alzheimer's, and must
consult his notebook to find the exhibition. Clark and Chalmers posit that the
information in Otto's notebook is the same as the information in Inga's head.
And were the notebook literally inside Otto's brain somehow, we would have no
trouble equating the two cognitive acts of remembrance: Inga simply remembers
how to get to the exhibition, while Otto incorporates some cognitive aids to
facilitate his memory.6

For the externalists—Clark, Chalmers, Wilson, and others—the differences
between Otto's and Inga's case are superficial: both are engaged in essentially
identical cognitive tasks of recollection. On this view Otto's usage of a
notebook constitutes something like a unified cognitive system, which
encompasses parts of Otto's brain and parts of the physical pen-and-paper
apparatus. The pen and the notebook simply constitute the material or
technological elements of the system, enabling the storage and the retrieval of
information. Similarly, the notation itself—the alphabet by which Otto is able
to encode the needed information—can be seen as a symbolic and social component
of the system. Not just Otto's notes, but all language, according to the
externalists, serves as a kind of ready-made mental scaffolding, which enables
a level of computation and analysis otherwise unavailable to primates.7 The
study of cognition therefore must expand beyond the skin-and-bone boundary of
the human brain to include the social, symbolic, and material (technological)
artifacts involved in human thought. To study Otto's brain is to also to study
the pen, the notebook, and the notes Otto takes when he uses these things to
remember the details of his appointment.  In another paradigmatic example of
HEC-based analysis, Edwin Hutchins examines the workings of a commercial
airliner in flight, showing "how the cockpit system performs the cognitive task
of computing and remembering a set of correspondences between airspeed and wind
configuration."8 The system-level view of cognition draws attention to the
combination of mechanical, electronic, and biological processes responsible for
the flow and storage of information within the plane's cockpit. The system can
be said to "remember" its speeds, writes Hutchins. It "computes," "controls,"
"makes use of representations" and otherwise distributes cognitive labor. Were
we to ask, "Who is landing the plane?" we would expect Hutchins to answer "the
cockpit system as a whole."9

Two types of extension The opponents of HEC reject the view of cognition as
anything other than what goes on inside the body and the brain. Fred Adams and
Ken Aizawa in particular have staked out a clearly delineated position in
defense of what the authors call "contingent intracranialism." On this view,
the "mark of the cognitive" is located squarely within the brain, as a matter
of a contingent empirical fact.10 To prove their point, Adams and Aizawa
compare our intuitions about human tool use and animal digestion. Imagine
someone using loping shears to trim a bush, for example. Although the activity
of "trimming-a-bush" as a whole seems to be a combined product of human
muscular contraction and the mechanical capabilities of the loping shears, we
would not be compelled to think of loping shears as "extended muscular
contraction."

By contrast, something like arachnoid digestion constitutes a digestive process
that is truly external. Arachnoid digestion happens outside of the spider's
body literally: the spider regurgitates digestive enzymes into or unto its
prey. What happens in our stomachs happens outside the strict corporeal
boundaries of the spider. We could therefore meaningfully talk about "extended
digestion" when it comes to spiders. But, for Adams and Aizawa, Otto's
notebook-reliant memory looks less like arachnoid digestion and more like the
discrete movement of muscle against the mechanism of the garden shears. Otto is
not thinking literally outside of his head. Like the man with the garden
shears, he is using a tool to compliment the exercise of some internal,
biological function. But it seems to me that this line of reasoning is simply
begging the question. Adams and Aizawa merely appeal to a scientific standard
of internalism, where the scientific standard is precisely the thing that is
being called into question. One gets the sneaking suspicion that the argument
is really about definitions, with one side appealing to common sense and the
other to scientific standards.11 My own suspicions about HEC rise from the
observation that the existentialist argument seems to contain two distinct
propositions about the nature of cognitive extension, each carrying distinct
implications for practical analysis of complex cognitive tasks. Let's return to
the example suggested by Hutchins in "How a Cockpit Remembers its Speed". We
begin by noting that a plane is a curiously anthropomorphic structure. It has
something like a head, a tail, and a belly: cockpit windows where we would
expect eyes, and a hole where we would expect to see an anus. It is thus easy
to imagine this structure as sentient somehow. We may for example, say "it
thinks, it sees," or "it eats" without much stretching of the imagination.

### Critique of Extended Cognition

Suppose then, instead of discussing a complex, high-level biological process
such as cognition, we were to talk about digestion. The hypothesis of extended
digestion would then hold that digestion is not limited by the human body, and
that it may be seen as a systematic property of the plane as a whole. On this
view, the plane—its service staff and food storage mechanisms—all participate
in digestion, defined by the uptake of food, its distribution, and the disposal
of waste. We may even go as far as to say that digestion is something that
happens in the belly of the plane. Food is conveyed within by some mechanical
means, it is then divvied up among the passengers, processed, and expelled in
bulk with the emptying of the airplane's holding tanks.

How far are we willing to take the proposition of airplane digestion? Not very
far at all, I would argue. Clearly, this is not digestion as we know it. It has
some structural affinities to animal digestion (the food is conveyed within,
broken down, expelled) along with important structural differences (the food it
is not metabolized, for example). Thus a strong claim to airplane digestion
must be rejected as an imprecise metaphor, by which the concept of a given
process is transferred from one entity to another by structural similarity (the
same would hold true were we to consider fueling as a type of digestion).

Such metaphoric transference may prove to be conceptually useful in certain
types of analysis, as when the airlines want to improve the timely feeding of
their passengers, for example. "The plane needs to eat," they might say. "Our
staff has to feed the plane in a timely fashion." But, the metaphor strains
under scrutiny. We may as well stick to a more exacting description of the
process. In any case, what we have done here is extend the natural concept of
"digestion" (in its ordinary meaning) to an inanimate entity, or a system of
entities that includes biological and non-biological components. Furthermore,
we have discovered that such a functional analogy is subject to confusion by
metaphor.

Extrapolating from these observations, we should be able to draw the same
conclusions about cognition. The cockpit may look as if it is "'remembering its
speed," but its "memory"' is a mere metaphor. The two processes— human
remembrance and whatever happens in the cockpit—never reach full equivalence.
The metaphor does not inspire our full commitment. It is an alluring metaphor
however, particularly because the cockpit's shape and location (in relation to
the body of the plane) remind us of the human head. It might be a useful
metaphor for analyzing the information flow within the cockpit, but it is
imprecise when it comes to understanding human cognition as such. All that is
meant by human cognition does not map precisely unto the cognition as applied
to the airplane cockpit. Clearly some parts of the original definition are
simply left out—the firing of neurons and the transmission of glutamate, GABA,
or dopamine. Some aspect of the cockpit's operation may be likened to those
biological processes, but nobody would hold that they are fully equivalent.

There is a possibility of another, weaker claim to extended digestion, to
continue our example. The conveyance of food from the grocery shelves to the
mouth of an individual airplane passenger may well be an important part of that
passenger's digestive process. We are no longer talking about digestion in a
metaphoric sense, as we did when thinking about the belly of the plane. I mean
now literal digestion, as in "the breaking down of food." In that sense, there
is no reason for us to view our own digestion as much different from a
spider's. The preparation of food external to the human body could be viewed
much in the same way as we view arachnoid digestion. Both are external
processes evolved to aid in the break-down of tissues otherwise difficult to
digest internally. The spider regurgitates enzymes, where we use a knife, a
fork, a cheese grater, or any other kitchen implement for that matter.
Following similar logic, we may view the catering company responsible for
preparing the airline food as part of that extended digestion system. The
cooks, the forks, and the stewards all literally facilitate the break-down and
the conveyance of food into the passenger's belly. More than a thought
experiment, the understanding of digestion in this extended sense could be
quite useful in certain types of analysis, as in identifying the cause of
foodborne illness, for example. In the previous case we were making a
biomorphic analogy between two distinct processes: the digestion of food and
the fuelling or the supply of the plane. But now, we are actually trying to
expand the original concept of digestion, usually thought to be an internal
process, to include all sort of external mechanisms. We are no longer making an
imprecise analogy. Our position is one of true digestive externalism.  But in
expanding the definition of digestion outwards, we run into what I would like
to call "the problem of arbitrary limits." Let us return to cognition for the
moment. In thinking about the cognitive tasks involved in landing a plane, we
began by including the cockpit instrumentation and the communication between
the pilots into the equation. But why limit ourselves to the plane in our
analysis? The runway participates in the landing, and so do the dispatchers in
the control tower. We may then say the airport system as a whole is landing the
plane. That too seems to be an arbitrary boundary. The dispatchers rely on a
global network which memorizes, computes, and predicts landing parameters. At
the limits of this query is unbridled monism. The activity of "landing a plane"
begins to lose its meaning when the activity of the pilot is coupled with the
entire universe.

I conclude then, to say that extending the concept of cognition to the cockpit
of the plane is subject to the limit problem. The disavowal of the body and/or
brain as the natural boundary of cognition leads to an arbitrary placement of
yet another boundary. We have simply substituted the natural physical limits of
the brain with those of the airplane cockpit. And nothing holds us back from
pushing the boundaries of cognition ever outward. Every boundary seems
artificial, and every system seems to be a part of a larger system that could
be seen as participating in the cognitive task at hand. In embracing the
extension hypothesis literally, we have traded metaphoric imprecision for the
problem of arbitrary limits.
### History of Man-Machine journal

### Works Cited
