## Chapter 4: Simulation

`metaphor machine, smart contract`

Reading Jean Baudrillard at the end of the century prior, I understood his
writing on simulacra in relationship to ersatz entertainment: amusement parks,
virtual reality, reality television, and the like. I am only now beginning to
comprehend the extent of the simulation. Computational metaphor machines
mediate experience ubiquitously. They interject in simple everyday acts from
drinking coffee in the morning, through brewing and payment systems, to going
to bed as alarm clocks and night activity monitors.

Baudrillard writes:

> At the limit of an always increasing elimination of references and
> finalities, an ever-increasing loss of resemblances and designations, we
> find the digital and programmatic sign, whose "value" is purely *tactical*,
> at the intersection of other signals ("bits" of information/tests) whose
> structure is that of a micromolecular code of command and control
> [@baudrillard_selected_1988, 139-140].

Somewhere between the sites of storage (what is) and projection (what appears
to be), the computed sign undergoes a series of structural transformations. In
the last chapter, we saw a glimpse of that process. What started out as a
thought became a letter, a signal, a magnetic mark, a phase of the liquid
crystal, and finally a ray of light. Programming languages guide thought
through a series of transformations in the passage between bodies, screens,
and archives. Languages, natural and artificial, break thought up into
differentiated units. Simulation reassembles the units back into a continuous
integrated whole. Texts made of discrete pixels congeal into holistic literary
works. Roman Jakobson called such construction and deconstruction of meaning
the "profuse exchange of ritualized formulas" or the phatic function of
language [@malinowski_problem_1923, 146; @jakobson_closing_1960, 355]. In the
phatic function lies the essence of formatting.

But before we can begin to peel apart layers of form, formatting, and formula
in the next chapter, I need to outline a few salient features of the
computational metaphor. Computation proceeds through metaphor, as I will argue
here. And the metaphor often breaks in a way that occludes the incongruence
between the visible representation and the underlying material affordances of
the medium. What you see is not always what you get. We are instead confronted
with a composite image, which under examination reveals a complex process of
transfiguration between the visible sign and the sign at the site of the
inscription.

### 4.1 Metaphor Machines

To understand the "loss of resemblances" in the process of simulation, imagine
communicating by telegraph in two different languages with a friend.
Occasionally, besides whatever else you wanted to say, envision also sending a
signal to your partner's device that indicated a change in the transmission
language. Thus in addition to the message, you would also send a predetermined
code that would switch the receiving apparatus from the "English language"
into the "French language" mode. Such an instruction would attune the receiver
to a different mode of apprehension. In our example, it would transform an
English language machine into a French language one. It is in that sense of
attunement that the programmatic sign acquires its non-representational,
tactical character. Stripped of references, resemblances, and designations the
programmatic sign commands and controls.

Yet despite the formative impact on the structure of comprehension, the
programmatic sign does not often figure in our theories of meaning making.
Instead, we erroneously consign it to the ornamental "formatting" layer of
document structure. We do so at our peril. Unlike passive decorative elements
like fleurons (❦ ❧), daggers and pilcrows (†‡¶), box drawings (╝╞╟), and other
dingbats (✇ ❖ ➿ ) the programmatic sign actively molds text to context. At the
maximally blunt limit of its abilities, the formatting layer affects
visibility. For example, it can selectively render some words and sentences on
the screen while suppressing others. The ability to hide text from view
completely or to make it so small as to be illegible affects not just the
style but the politics of text. Formatting, in that sense, can determine its
audience, privileging certain voices and modes of access over others.

Unlike figurative language, machine control languages function in the
imperative.  They do not stand for action---they are action. More binding than
J.L.  Austin's "speech acts," control codes arrange and regulate. The
difference between representation and control is one of brute force. It lies
in the distinction between a restraining order and physical restraint. A
restraining order *represents* the calling forth of codified power. Physical
restraints, like the plastic handcuffs widely used in contemporary policing,
*enact* the exercise of codified power. Like all violence they do not stand
for anything. Stripped of references, resemblances, and designations, they are
in themselves an arrangement and rearrangement of matter. The handcuffs
contort the body into the shape of submission. Absent a body, the restraints
draw an empty shape.

Code acts similarly to shape the word. Located somewhere between idea and
material, formatting relates content to matter. It mediates by imposing
structure. Think of a paragraph, for example. By convention, writers use
paragraphs to break up the flow of monolithic "thought" on a page. The
paragraph contains information. Emptied of content, it simply ceases to exist.
Can there be an empty paragraph? Can the shape of the paragraph persist
outside of the material confines of the page or the screen? Can one imagine a
paragraph that unfolds spatially not in two dimensions, but in one, along a
straight line? What about a three dimensional paragraph? Could it take shape
of a cuboid instead instead of a rectangle? These questions boggle the mind
because the paragraph draws a singular shape. It is a textual container of a
type. Any other shape less or more than the paragraph would go by another
name. It would constitute another format. To imagine something like a
one-dimensional paragraph is akin to imagining a flat shoebox. A flat shoebox
could no longer hold shoes. It would contain something else like images of
footwear. Similarly, a paragraph identifies a particular arrangement of
elements. It is a box or a data structure of a shape, made to hold words and
sentences. Like nesting dolls, words and sentences are in themselves data
structures that contain further, smaller arrangements of information.

One could say, what of such arrangements? Who cares about paragraphs? It is
merely one type of a container among many. It has only an instrumental
function to help get the point across. The meat of interpretation lies in the
stuff within. Words come in other shapes and sizes. The outer container is
disposable and therefore insignificant. In this and the next chapter, I will
argue to the contrary, maintaining that formats could only seem insignificant
when they were few and simple. The transition between static and dynamic
layouts necessitates renewed attention to form and format. What you saw is
what you got on the page. On the screen, what you see is but a small part of
what you get. The content---all that is contained on a page---shifts beneath
the projected image.

In print, the content can be gleaned from the surface. There is nothing but
surface on a page. On a screen, the visible surface is but a small part of the
content. A byte, made up of eight binary bits, holds a letter. The string of
letters spelling out "hello world" occupies eleven bytes, if you count the
space. A file in the Portable Document Format (`.pdf`) containing nothing but
"hello world" takes up 24,335 bytes on my system. Formatting accounts for the
disparity between plain text and fancy text, the latter defined as "text
representation consisting of plain text plus added information"
[@unicode_consortium_unicode_1990]. What is the nature of this "added
information?" Historically, the added information included machine
instructions for viewing and printing text, encoding, or encryption, used for
clandestine communication. Portable Document Format specifically can also
contain features that enable "accessibility of content to those with
disabilities," "digital signatures to certify authenticity," "electronic forms
to gather data," "preservation of document fidelity independent of the device,
platform, and software," and "security and permission to allow the creator to
retain control of the document and associated rights" [@iso_portable_2008,
vii]. These capabilities operate somewhere between the visible content and
stored information. More than passive conduits of meaning, electronic texts
contain the rules for engagement between authors and their readers. Embedded
structures project an ontology. In our example, the Portable Document Format
encodes, among other things, ideas about "reading," "authenticity,"
"fidelity," "preservation," and "authorship." Whatever literary theoretical
framework the reader brings to the process of interpretation must therefore
meet the framework implicit in the electronic text itself. Such an encounter
happens not on the level of representation or ideology, but on the level of
the physical, the phatic, and the imperative, where formatting and control
reside.

The familiar paper paragraph structure already presents several interesting
problems for analysis. In claiming typographical space on a page the paragraph
suggests corresponding mental units. A unit of written language thus also
becomes in some sense a unit of thought. But no such structures as paragraphs
exist in the mind. At the level of physiology, the brain arranges information
otherwise. Things get significantly more complicated when the paragraph acts
to mediate between the mind and the page on the one side of comprehension, and
the page and the machine on the other.

![Forms and formats.](images/forms.png)

Just like there is nothing inherently paragraph-like in the neural arrangement
of the brain, there is also nothing inherently paragraph-like or page-like in
the arrangement of bits along the surface of the magnetic disk or the solid
state drive. We are presented instead with metaphors of paragraphs, pages,
files, and folders. Screen representations of paragraphs, pages, files, and
folders look like their counterparts on the page, yet they represent other
structures in the head, and yet other structures on the disk. The file format
thus mediates between mental image---information stored in the head---and
inscription---information stored in the machine.

In the language of cognitive metaphor theory, the kind of interface metaphors
that we have been discussing so far go under the name of *structural metaphors*.
"Structural metaphors allow us to do much more than just orient concepts,"
Lakoff and Johnson wrote [@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 61]. Grounded in "systematic
correlations within our experience," they transfer organizing principles from
one domain to another. Thus to say something like "time is money" is not just
to compare time an money visually or ontologically, but to suggest that
something in the arrangement of the financial system resembles something in
the arrangement of the temporal system [@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 65-8]. If
metaphors work by transferring qualities, structure is the quality being
transferred in all of the above cases. Structural metaphors organize one thing
in the shape of another.

On an abstract level, structural substitution defines computation in general.
Recall for a moment Turing's seminal definition of the universal computing
machine, discussed at length in the first chapter. What he called a "computing
machine" involved a finite number of configurations of "tape" and "symbol."
The machine attains a universal quality when configurations of tape and symbol
can substitute for all other forms of symbolic manipulation. In this way a
universal computer can emulate a word processor, a fairy tale world, or a
calculator. Turing's universal computing machine is a type of a structural
metaphor by definition. It has the ability to represent all other symbolic
machine states, symbolically. Being a universal symbolic manipulator, the
Turing machine is able to extend all metaphors. That is not to say that it can
*do* anything. For example, one cannot use a computational device to hammer
nails. But a computer can be used to extend the metaphor of hammering nails
into the virtual realm.

The language of computation reveals its reliance on metaphor in practice.
Consider the following passage from a patent filed by Xerox in 1991. It
describes, in its own words, "an electronic library metaphor," which includes:

> a shared books with data base metaphor, a reference books metaphor, and a
> card catalog metaphor in one system that allows large object oriented data
> bases to be organized and accessed in an exclusive environment and in
> addition allows access to screen icons, creates a visual hierarchy of
> related and shared objects, and allows mutually exclusive access to the
> metaphors within the library [@pajak_electronic_1992, 1].

The invention ultimately enables the "organizing, accessing, and querying of
information unique to physical libraries in an electronic workstation
environment" [@pajak_electronic_1992, 1]. Setting aside, for a moment, the
peculiarity of being able to patent a metaphor, note the idiosyncrasy of the
technical language. What does it mean to "access" a metaphor? When someone
"checks out" a book from the electronic library, do they gain access to the
book or to the metaphor? Traditional metaphor theory does not prepare us to
answer such questions.

In the so-called classical view, metaphors are simply a type of figurative
language. To say "the day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops" is to use
the verb "stand" in a novel linguistic context. Days have no literal legs to
stand on. John Searle, John Lakoff, and Mark Turner, among others, have argued
that metaphor is a more broadly a cognitive phenomenon, mapping distinct
ontological categories across "conceptual domains" [@lakoff_metaphors_1980;
@turner_death_1987; @lakoff_contemporary_1998, @searle_metaphor_1998]. In the
modified view, even such basic semantic concepts as "state, quantity, action,
cause, purpose, means, modality" are metaphorical in nature
[@lakoff_metaphorical_1980; @lakoff_contemporary_1998, 212]. Beyond
figurative, lyrical language, Lakoff and others have argued that metaphors
structure everyday experience. Thus the analysis of common phrases like
"things are looking up" and "I can't get that tune out of my mind" reveals
underlying figuration like "good things are up" and "the mind is a container
[@lakoff_metaphorical_1980, 195-198].

!["An exemplary interface for viewing a three dimensional book"
[@card_methods_2006, 3].](images/book-metaphor.png)

!["Alternate display techniques for information about a big book"
[@card_methods_2006,4].](images/book-3d.png)

The transference of structuring principles from one system to another---from
"physical libraries" to "electronic workstations environments," in our case---
reveals the formative nature of the structural metaphor. Metaphors that can be
touched and handled in some way exist neither wholly in language nor wholly in
the mind. Rather, they operate in action, at hand. John Carrol, one of the
pioneers in the field of human--computer interaction, summarized the role of
metaphors in the design of computing systems as follows:

> Professional programmers might learn a new system X by metaphorizing at
least initially from what they already know about system Y. More casual or
naive end-users might rely on metaphors drawn from more distant knowledge
domains, e.g. on what they have already learned about electric typewriters.
The implications of this proposal are simple and direct. If people employ
metaphors in learning about computing systems, [MISSING WORD] of those systems
should anticipate and support likely metaphorical constructions to increase
the ease of learning and using the system [@carroll_metaphor_1982, 107-108]."

In essence, Carroll imagines human--computer interfaces that enact Lakoff and
Johnson's "conceptual blending" in practice. In this way, the familiar gesture
of discarding a crumpled piece of paper into the waste bin can be simulated
digitally to handle the deletion of electronic documents. Apple's influential
*Human Interface Guidelines*, at the core of Apple's desktop interfaces in the
1980s, echo Carroll proscriptions:

> You can take advantage of people's knowledge of the world around them by
using metaphors to convey concepts and features of your application. Use
metaphors involving concrete, familiar ideas and make the metaphors plain,
so that users have a set of expectations to apply to computer environments.
For example, people often use folders to store paper documents in their
offices. Therefore, it makes sense to people to store computer documents in
computer-generated folders that look like files and folders. People can
organize their hard disks in a way that's analogous to the way they organize
their file cabinets [@apple_apple_1987, 4].

Apple's designers understood also that the mapping of concepts between the
physical and the computer-generated worlds is imperfect. For example, unlike a
real-world file folder, constrained by the size of its containing cabinet, a
computer folder can hold a nearly unlimited amount of files. Or, to be more
precise, the electronic folder metaphor is subject to different constraints
than those that limit the use of a paper file. The image of the paper file
should not therefore limit the possibilities of the metaphor's implementation,
the manual explains. It further advises to "strike a balance between the
metaphor's suggested use and the ability of the computer to support and extend
the metaphor" [@apple_apple_1987, 5].

A number of patents from IBM, Xerox, and Microsoft rely on the language of
metaphor extension. Consider United States Patent #5,907,854 by Paula J. Cox
et.al. of International Business Machines. The invention describes "a library
metaphor that allows a user to organize the online books in a manner that has
meaning and utility." The authors go on to explain that "while the actual
books may be stored in many separate and distinct locations [...] the bookcase
provides a familiar classification system." They go on to write that the
creation of bookcase metaphors involves "the creation of appropriate links to
the actual online book/bookshelf/bookcase." The "book metaphor" ultimately
"provides an easy to understand and intuitive model for a user who might not
be familiar with on-line viewing tools" [@cox_method_1999].

Another metaphor machine can be found in the collaboration between the
influential product design firm IDEO and Xerox. The two worked on an early
file manager shell PC Catalog, later renamed to TabWorks. In describing the
design process, IDEO developers wrote about defining "key elements of the
metaphor" contained in the image of "tabs" and "catalogs." "The book *cover*,"
they wrote, "opened to display three *rings* binding a set of divider *tabs*,
each containing one or more *pages*." Pages, in turn contained *items* or
"icons representing documents or applications"
[@moll-carrillo_articulating_1995, 1-7]. In a similar binder-based software
application, the engineers at IBM describe the "contents of the notebook
metaphor," which are "displayed as a stack of sheets." "In this way, the
interface [...] permits a user to directly manipulate the sheets in the
notebook metaphor" [@glaser_graphical_1995]. The user is meant to handle the
metaphor in all of the above examples. The metaphor structures the material
affordances of the simulation according to the rules of the physical world.

Metaphor machines present us with a special case of conceptual domain
blending. In the cognitive view, the metaphor performs a number of
"conventional mapping from one domain to another" [@lakoff_contemporary_1998,
239]. Lakoff mentions for example the common trope of "a state is a person,"
implicit in the ideas of a "friendly" or a "hostile" states
[@lakoff_contemporary_1998, 243]. In this way ideas about agency, emotion, and
mental life usually attached to people can be extended to state actors.
Similarly, to say that someone is "boiling mad," instantiates the common trope
of "anger is a hot liquid in a container." In this case, common known
properties attached to the domain of physics can be mapped onto the domain of
emotion. Lakoff further explains that such domain mappings tend follow a few
rules. They are usually partial and asymmetrical. "Mappings are not
arbitrary," he writes, "but grounded in the body and in everyday experience
and knowledge." Finally domain mapping obeys what Lakoff call the Invariance
Principle, by which "the image schema structure of the source domain is
projected onto the target domain in a way that is consistent with inherent
target domain structure" [@turner_conceptual_1995; @lakoff_contemporary_1998;
@ruiz_de_mendoza_ibanez_nature_1998; @lakoff_invariance_2009].

The principles of metaphor-driven design contain an implicit model of
human--computer interaction. It implies that humans prefer not to manipulate
digital information stored on computational media directly. Instead, they
would manipulate digital information by the means of familiar mediating
structures---paragraphs, pages, files, and folders---associated figuratively
to the affordances of print media. We know, in other words, what paragraphs,
pages, files, and folders can do on paper and we would digital paper to behave
in a similar way. For example, one affordance of paper is that it can be
folded. It therefore becomes possible to "earmark" a page by folding a corner.
The fold enables subsequent recollection of read text. By this means, a reader
is able to mark a notable place in the text and to return to it later quickly,
if needed. The digital medium cannot physically be folded in the same way
because it offers a set of affordances that differ from paper. But because
readers are not familiar with "what can be done" digitally, the affordances of
digital media are presented through metaphor. Thus a virtual "earmark" on a
"page" can be made to represent a numerical pointer to a specific address in
the computer memory. And a "page" could stand for a range of related addresses
that correspond roughly to the information visible on an analogous page in
print. Similarly one "drops a folder into the trash bin" or "drags and drops a
file" or "bookmarks a page." Such metaphors rely on habituated insight with
one medium extended into another. We do not literally "drag" or "drop" bits,
but we use metaphors of paper and trashcan to help us manipulate bits and
bytes as if they were household objects. The metaphor opens figurative
possibilities. But it also obscures the actual physical contingencies of
interacting with bits and bytes, logic gates and magnetic traces.

Bits and bytes differ from files and folders, pages and paragraphs in what
they can do. The affordances of the physical medium differ drastically from
affordances of the simulated one. The metaphorical substitution encourages
readers to extend the facility they have with manipulating one sort of media
(paper and ink) to another (screen and pixels). But what readers gain in
facility, they lose in critical faculty. Alienated from the actual physical
structures of information storage and retrieval, readers gain access to the
metaphor alone. Thus we "turn the page" but in reality redraw the screen. We
"highlight a passage" but in reality send information about the highlighted
passage to a data aggregation service. We "share a book" but in reality assign
a temporary license to another user. Where did the text go? someone asks when
downloading a paper from an online journal.[^ln4-nested] It is in your "home"
I answer. But unless one of us is familiar with the material contingencies of
file storage, neither has a mental map of any physical location corresponding
to the "home" directory, the default location of personal files on many
systems. When confronted with the actual affordances of digital text, the user
grasps for neutered metaphors. We "reside" in such homes, "own," "share," and
"create" only in the simulacrum.

The metaphors of human-computer interaction conceal the structure of
computation. Print offers a relatively static and stable medium for knowledge
transmission. Ink and paper do not change in transit. By contrast, the vessels
of computation are capable of altering the content dynamically.  Imagine me
asking you to read Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, for example, by lending you a copy
of the text. In the case of a paper book, I may be sure that the text in my
hands will remain the same as I pass it into yours. But the computed sign also
has the capability to adjust itself to new contexts. For example, the
simulated *Hamlet* may adapt to the new reader's geographic location, mood, or
political affiliation. In fact, most texts we consume today come to us in such
computationally constructed way. The front page of the New York Times viewed
in Beijing will differ from the front page viewed in New York. The two "pages"
or "sites" are in some sense two completely different texts. But in another
sense, the "front page" identifies the same location of the same text, in two
diverging and dynamically composed versions. They feed off of the same
sources. The same source code gives rise to both texts. Nothing is guaranteed
in the passage of electronic text from one pair of hands into another. Digital
formatting expands its purview far beyond typographical convention. The
erasure of words, word substitution, automatic summarization, wholesale
generation of discourse by algorithmic means---the command and control layer
contains all such possibilities. What does it mean to read and to interpret a
dynamic text, which changes depending on its context? How can literary
analysis---close reading, philology, hermeneutics---persist without the fixity
of print?

The key to understanding "the loss of resemblances" that accompanies
ubiquitous simulation lies in the inner dynamics of metaphor machinery.  A
functioning metaphor, if you would recall from Lakoff, is one which ferries
the schematic composition of one domain into another. Thus to say "life is a
stage" is to transpose something about theater onto life. In literary terms,
the theater is "tenor" where "life" is "vehicle" of the composite figure
[@richards_philosophy_1936]. Simulation works differently. Where the
traditional metaphor structures across two domains, the simulation substitutes
the "signs of the real for the real" [@baudrillard_simulacra_1994, 2]. It is a
subtle difference that engenders not-so-subtle effects. For example, it is one
thing to say "you are the apple of my eye" and quite another to actually
confuse eye pupils and apples. Baudrillard gives the example of a map that no
longer corresponds to any territory. He calls such a condition of pure
simulation without a referent *hyper-reality*. We expect a simulation to
attain a measure of correspondence between representation and the thing being
represented. For example, in theory, a weather simulation should be capable of
modeling observed meteorological conditions. But would it be a weather
simulation if the model was broken in some way, or, in the extreme, if it had
no correspondence to the physics of meteorology? The hyper-real breaks further
still by usurping the underlying reality. The model does not merely obscure,
it takes place of the thing being modeled. In other words, it begins to
simulate itself, according to its own rules. The simulation no longer
corresponds to any situation "on the ground." Severed from the referent, the
symbol itself attains the status of reality. Thus hyper-reality: a symbol that
folds onto itself. It is a weather simulation confused for weather.

The interface metaphor does not quite attain the status of hyper-reality.
Rather, it exchanges one referent for another. Simulation should, by
definition, "assume a form resembling that of something else"
[@_simulation_2015]. Metaphor machines assume the form of one thing, while
structuring another. To drag and drop a document into a trashcan on the
screen, for example, should in theory correspond to an analogous set of of
data manipulations on the disk. Yet, "discarding a file" in this manner does
not necessarily include deletion of data from the storage medium, as expected.
The representation of the document may disappear visually where the
inscription endures. Such "loss of resemblances" could be insignificant. Do
care if the file was actually deleted or not when performing deletion? Perhaps
not in most cases. But in some cases, when it really matters---under the
threat of censorship or persecution, for example---the incongruence exposes
the frailty of our alienation. Our grasp of the material contingencies weakens
the more convincing the simulacrum.

Consider the commonplace task of "turning pages" in the act of writing or
reading digital texts. In cognitive linguistic terms, the idea of paper pages
should somehow extend into the domain of manipulating digital information. In
literary terms, the projection of a page on the screen carries the tenor of
paper pagination. In this way, the turning of simulated pages implies a
certain familiar arrangement of matter. Readers know what to do with paper
pages. They understand its affordances. The metaphor encourages readers to
extend their knowledge of the physical world into the projected, virtual
world. For example, paper pages can be turned. We know they usually proceed
one another, sequentially. And we are attuned to expect the same attributes to
hold true in the vehicle---the domain receiving the tenor of the metaphor.
The action of turning virtual pages should, in theory, set off a series of
corresponding actions in the target digital domain. In other words, turning
the page on the screen should correspond to a similar action on the disk. But
the action does necessarily meet our expectations. The arrangement of
information stored on the disk affords different physical actions from the
arrangement of information on a page. An English-language character on the
disk occupies eight bits on a disk where a print character occupies one. The
disk can tolerate millions of rewrites, where the paper medium wears out after
only a few. The paper inscription is visible to the naked eye where the
digital inscription is not.

The simulation is necessary perhaps, because the reading and writing of
digital data can involve processes far outside of everyday experience. For
example, in reading data from solid state (FLASH) memory a circuit imparts
electrical charge through quantum tunneling onto a connected series of
floating gate transistors [@pavan_flash_1997; @bez_introduction_2003].

!["Perspective view of a portion of a charge translating device illustrating a
preferred electrical contact arrangement." From
[@boyle_information_1974].](images/floating-gate.png)

Whatever the complexities of solid state storage architecture, the difference
in arrangement of information between pages and floating gates---at the root
of modern "sold state" storage---is apparent. The structure of one has only an
arbitrary connection to the structure of the other. Consequently change in the
structure of one domain do not necessitate changes in the structure of
another: to "erase a word" on a projected, virtual page thus may not have the
corresponding effect on the level of the storage medium. The information may
persist despite the intended erasure. We hope that the analogy between paper
and pixel achieves a level of verisimilitude. Turning the page or erasing a
word on the screen should do something similar on the disk. But we also know
that not to be the case. The metaphor is broken similar to Baudrillard's map
that no longer reflects any terrain. The computational metaphor simulates the
familiar but absent affordances tied to an absent print artifact. The
simulation suggests a structuring of one kind, while enacting a structure of
another.

### 4.2 The Death of a Metaphor

In poetics, a metaphor is said to be "motivated" when a set of concepts from
one domain extends into another to produce insight [@lakoff_contemporary_1998,
210-1]. Lakoff explains that to say something like "to spin one's wheels" when
referring to someone who is thinking is to apply the reader's knowledge of
automobiles to the mental realm. The speaker may hold a notion that spinning
wheels waste energy without moving the car forward. The metaphor suggests that
something like that is happening mentally as well [@lakoff_contemporary_1998,
211]. A metaphor in a figurative genre like prose or poetry works similarly by
suggesting novel and hitherto unexplored connections between domains. In his
influential essay on metaphor the English literary critic I.A. Richards
explains that "when we use metaphor we have two thoughts of different things
active together and supported by a single word, or phrase, whose meaning is a
resultant of their interaction" [@richards_philosophy_1936, 95]. Richards's
radical contribution to the study of metaphor lie in the observation that
metaphor operates in language, thought, and action ubiquitously. It does not,
as previously thought, exist merely in the realm of poetic language. Thought
in itself, Richards believed, is metaphoric in that the mind continually
searches for patterns and comparisons [@richards_philosophy_1936, 94]. The
motivated metaphor produces novel insight: a tool to explore and to make sense
of the world.

Some metaphors are, in this way, more productive than others. The poetic use
of the metaphor does not merely carry meaning across known domains, it
produces new and unexpected connections between them. To this effect, Richards
cites the poet Percy Shelley who wrote the following in defence of poetry:

> [poetic] language is vitally metaphorical; that is, it marks the before
> unapprehended relations of things and perpetuates their apprehension, until
> the words which represent them, become, through time, signs for portions or
> classes of thoughts instead of pictures of integral thoughts; and then if no
> new poets should arise to create afresh the associations which have been
> thus disorganized, language will be dead to all the nobler purposes of human
> intercourse [@shelley_essays_1840].

Shelley anticipates what the cognitive school of metaphor theory was to
confirm by empirical means more than a century later [@mojtabai_delusion_2000;
@billig_metaphor_2005]. Metaphors do not "die" as such. They continue to live,
but also become naturalized: that is understood literally. They create
connections that with time become habituated and invisible to their users. In
other words, taken for literal truth, the metaphor loses its metaphoric
quality. For example, for many readers the very idea of a "dead metaphor"
itself may no longer evoke death as such. Perhaps they understand "death" of
the dead metaphors to function synonymously with "convention" or
"idiom."[^ln4-dead] In Shelley view, metaphors are destined to become dead and
habituated only be reborn again in poetry. At its most generative stage, the
metaphor actively produces new meaning. The creative juxtaposition between two
as before unrelated domains brings new aspects of experience to light. But
with time, the poetic metaphor becomes a tired cliché. It longer "perpetuates
understanding." It dies in a sense of becoming a mere shortcut to
understanding.  In Viktor Shklovsky's words, we "cease to experience" the
trope. The metaphor "dries up" when we begin recognizing it without
apprehension [@shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914]. It no longer generates new
connection between domains, but merely reinforces existing ones.

Lakoff famously took exception with the idea "dead metaphor," arguing that
even those metaphors that are thoroughly habituated still play a vital part in
structuring everyday experience. He gave the example of the sentence: *He
still can't quite grasp the basic ideas of quantum mechanics*. Grasping in
this case is used as a synonym to "understanding." It indicates a transference
of properties between physical action (grasping) and mental space (thought).
The metaphor is alive, Lakoff wrote, because it continues to perform a
function. Even when dead in a sense, it names a mental activity that we would
otherwise find difficult to explain precisely. Such a metaphor is more alive
than other, perhaps more novel, "one off" poetic metaphors that failed to
become cultural tropes. Shelly's and Shklovsky's stark poetic metaphor works
once and never again. Lakoff's everyday metaphor continues to function
productively by contrast.

A truly dead metaphor for Lakoff is one in which the original source image no
longer makes sense. For example, the English word *pedigree* originally
referred to the French for "crane's foot," or *pied de grue*. The foot was
used as a typographical flourish to decorate centuries-old family-tree
diagrams. When we spoke of the metaphorical "grasping" of ideas, both sides of
the domain transference were readily available us. We understood something
about grasping things and extended it to the capacity of the mind to "take
hold" of ideas. By contrast, the *pied de grue* contained within the English
*pedigree* is no longer accessible to the average speaker. In one the first
case the metaphor is merely tired, where it is completely dead in the other.
For Lakoff, The idea of a dead metaphor does not appropriately differentiate
between the two cases [@lakoff_death_1987; @muller_metaphors_2008]. The
metaphor sometimes "dies" but continues to perform its function of intuitively
connecting two disparate domains. At other times, the metaphor dies in the
sense of one domain becoming no longer accessible to its user. Furthermore, a
wholly unmotivated metaphor does no work at all. Thus the non-sensual riddle
famously posed by the mad hatter to Alice in Lewis Carroll's *Alice in
Wonderland*: How is a raven like a writing desk? The dissimilarity between the
two domains---of animals and of furniture---prevents any productive
congruence.[^ln4-carroll]

To what extent does the interface metaphor live by the above definitions? When
discarding a document into a trash bin, in our reoccurring example, users
should theoretically map their knowledge of paper documents and paper waste
baskets onto the computational domain. Instead, the *idea* of discarding
something substitutes for the *material reality* of the corresponding action.
The concept blends not with another conceptual domain but with the material
affordances of the target medium. Such material affordances---our ability to
actually discard data, for example---stand in arbitrary relationship to the
source domain. Simply put we expect the thing to be deleted, but it is not.
The incongruence breaks Lakoff's Invariance Principle. Whatever structural
changes we expect to happen in the source domain do not carry on to the
target. The metaphor breaks in a sense. It becomes a dead metaphor even under
Lakoff's strict definitions.

As was the case with the "crane's foot" in the English "pedigree," the user of
the simulated document dustbin is missing one part of the metaphor equation.
Where in the case of "pedigree" English speakers fail to grasp the source or
the tenor of the metaphoric substitution, the case of the virtual dustbin is
missing the target, or the vehicle of the action. Discarding a document into
trash does not in fact correspond to a similar action in the target domain.
In either case, failing the full transference the metaphor ceases to function
properly [@lakoff_death_1987]. The interface metaphor fails to achieve
motivation. The analogy between discarding paper and erasing bits breaks down
in the worst possible way. The material realities of the metaphor are not
simply missing, they are misrepresented.

### 4.3 Smart Contracts

Exposing the Document Object Model that governs the production of text through
contemporary reading and writing devices gives the question of surface and
depth yet another connotation. What lies beneath the text? We are accustomed to
thinking about document structure metaphorically and answer in accord: meaning,
narrative, representation, order, discourse, or ideology. Interpretation, at
that level of analysis, happens in the head, which physically limits the
possibility of depth to personal introspection, magnetic resonance imaging, or,
at best, to an archive of extant reader responses (which in themselves need
further interpretation).

Incorporating the literary device as machine, gadget, or appliance into the
answer suggests another, more literal strategy of interpretation. Beneath a
text one finds cloth and wood pulp and, increasingly, also glass, plastic,
liquid crystal, copper, laminates, and silicone.

The move between paper and composite device carries with it a profound shift in
the physical affordances of the deep structure supporting all subsequent,
higher-order, surface-level representations of textuality. Not much space
separates ink from paper. There, textuality lies flat, in two dimensions. What
you see is truly what you get. Not so on the screen connected to other screens.
Networked and time-shared textuality extends into the third dimension, away
from the reader and deep into the bowels of the machine. The Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) reference model of communication[^ln3-osi] describes no
less than seven layers: from the Application Layer, concerned with the
semantics of application ("all services directly comprehensible to the user
[@miller_iso_1981, 285] to the Physical Layer, providing the "mechanical,
electrical, functional, and procedural characteristics" of communication
[@ncs_open_1981; @ncs_national_1988; @day_revised_1995].[^ln3-layers] These
protocols further envelop a document already thickly stratified by the
Document Object Model.[^ln3-domlayer]

[^ln3-domlayer]: The DOM technically exists at the application layer of the OSI
model.

![A zoomed out view of the connected OSI model. Single node structure on the
left. Connected devices on the right. The user has access through the top-most
(application) level, outermost to the network [@piatkowski_iso-ansi_1980,
114-15].](images/osi.png)

These are the same layers that Alexander Galloway unites in a system of what he
calls decentralized and distributed control [@galloway_protocol_2006, 28-54].
It is distributed to be sure, although to what extent decentralized is a matter
of some debate. Like a good soldier, each device in the pictured network
internalizes dozens if not hundreds of protocols that enable the system to
function seamlessly as a whole (in the way, for example, that your machine can
at one moment connect to one wireless access point, and at another moment to
another, with minimal loss of connectivity). Yet, OSI protocols and the DOM are
also densely consolidated. They are, for example, legislated by specific
international governing bodies[^ln3-w3c], susceptible to the usual political
pitfalls of pan-global consortia.

Once bifurcated between storage and screen, the inscription travels along a
"pipeline" of protocols, undergoing a set of arbitrary transformations
throughout. On one device, that pipeline may extend just a few inches,
connecting disk storage and output display. On a network device that pipeline
can stretch across continents, spanning widely divergent regions of legal and
administrative control. The book you are reading here may be stored in another
state or country. Whatever the case may be, the subject encounters the
"protocol stack" from without, on the periphery of the onion-like network. When
paging through an electronic book (usually an OSI-compliant device displaying
DOM-structured files), for example, the reader has access only to the outputs
emanating from the application layer, and, at that, only at the exposed
"window" level of the DOM. The perceived "content" constitutes a small fraction
of the underlying "formal" topology. What you see is far less than what you
get.

The application layer stops at the subject. Access to the layers intrinsic to
device operation (and consequently to analysis) are sometimes "merely" obscured
and sometimes made illicit outright, as is arguably the case with U.S. Code,
Title 17, Chapter 12, §1201, titled "Circumvention of copyright protection
systems" and passed as part of the "Digital Millennium Copyright Act" (DMCA) in
1998. A literary scholar may be familiar with some provisions of American
copyright law governing text as surface representation: US Code, Title 17
extends "exclusive rights" to "copyright owners" of "literary works." The
rights include the ability to "reproduce," "to prepare derivative works," "to
distribute copies," and "to perform and to display publicly" (17.1.106).
Surface representation is further subject to professional rules of conduct,
embodied in practices of quotation, citation, and attribution (or lack thereof,
as plagiarism).

In practice, the easy reproducibility of digital text (and image) has served to
erode the efficacy of copyright restrictions as a system of laws and
regulations. The work of art in the age of digital reproduction has lost much
of its already tenuous hold on the material substratum.[^ln3-illusion] Copy
technologies from photocopiers, to desktop printers, to cheap magnetic storage
and peer-to-peer file sharing networks reduce the price of copying and
dissemination to near frictionless levels. The response from the film, game,
music, and publishing industries has been to transpose mechanisms of copyright
enforcement from legal down to the infrastructural levels of enforcement, as
software and hardware: from Code to code. In the words of Charles Clark, the
late British publisher and prominent copyright attorney, "the answer to the
machine is in the machine [@clark_copyright_1996, 81-82]"---by which he meant
that copyright enforcement should be taken up on the device level by the
International Standards Organization, the very body responsible for the DOM and
the OSI communication protocol stack [@clark_copyright_1996, 84].

As an example of how that might work, Clark cites the Copyright in Transmitted
Electronic Data Report (CITED), which suggests building "a tamper proof
software module which acts rather like indestructible tachometers installed on
long-distance coaches and lorries, recording everything that happens to the
copyrighted or commercially valuable material [...] The basic idea is to link
the 'valuable material' of intellectual property to a specific piece of
software and hardware" [@consortium_c.i.t.e.d._1994; @clark_copyright_1996,
83-84].

The emergence of embedded contractual enforcement at the level of the device
can be subsumed under the broader idea of "smart contracts." In his seminal
article on "Formalizing and Securing Relationships in Public Networks," Nick
Szabo explains that "smart contracts combine protocols, user interfaces, and
promises expressed via those interfaces to formalize and secure relationships
over computer networks" [@szabo_formalizing_1997]. Clark, CITED, and Szabo were
instrumental in the rise of smart contracts in the 1990s in an attempt to
redress the fading efficacy of legal copyright protections.[^ln3-smart] "Method
and System for Managing a Data Object so as to Comply with Predetermined
Conditions for Usage" (US5845281, issued in 1998) can be instructive in this
regard. Greg Benson and Gregory H. Urich, both of Sweden, write:

> The data object owner may want to have permanent secure control over how,
when, where, and by whom his property is used. Furthermore, he may want to
define different rules of engagement for different types of users and different
type of security depending on the value of particular objects. The rules
defined by him shall govern the automated operations enabled by data services
and networking. The owner may also sell composite objects with different rules
governing each constituent objects. Thus, it is necessary to be able to
implement variable and extensible control.

The data object, in this case, stands for any media content, from books to
music, video, and software. Rather then legislating rules for copying and
distributing media, the inventors suggest that the medium itself should contain
a control layer that would "comply with predetermined conditions of usage," in
a way that can be "universally adapted to the needs of both the owner and the
user of the data object" [@benson_method_1998, 2:55].

!["Concatenated control data and AVI file in memory" [@benson_method_1998].](images/avi-control.png)

!["Concatenated and encrypted control data and AVI file in memory"
[@benson_method_1998].](images/avi-control2.png)

The associated schematics (pictured here) show data and control codes
"concatenated" into the same underlying data structure (in this case, AVI media
container format). The seemingly innocuous "text control" layer of the 1960s,
used to specify formatting and visual style, was now extended to carry
mechanisms for legal control, tied to specific legislation.

The idea of smart contracts contains a notable artifact of implementation,
relevant to our discussion on surface reading. To the extent that control codes
are legible to the interpreter, they are also open to "abuse and
circumvention." For this reason, encryption plays a key part in the smart
contracts system. Once intertwined, data and control must be encrypted to
prevent "unauthorized access." This brings us to the glaring problem at the
very heart of smart contract implementation. The spirit of contractual law by
its very nature demands *explicit* consent. In the language of English common
law, contracts involve promises as "manifestation of intention," which "adopt
an external or objective standard for interpreting conduct
[@american_law_institute_restatement_1973, §1-2.]" The key words in this
passage are "external," "objective," and "interpretation."

By contrast, smart contracts, as described in the patent archive, must rely on
encrypted---that is, not human-legible---forms of tacit compliance: neither
external, objective, nor available for interpretation. The idea of encrypted
consent stands in stark opposition to a tradition of contract law that relies
on models of consent that involve expressed, mutual, explicit, and uncoerced
forms of acquiescence. Even if smart contracts were to be accompanied by
legible documentation (as Terms of Service, for example), the device user would
be compelled to blindly trust in the correspondence between the expressed
letter and the implicit mechanism of the document---the implementation still
enacted beyond scrutiny, as hidden, encrypted, and purposefully illegible
script.

Moreover, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) stipulates that "no
person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls
access to a work protected under this title (17.1201.a.1.A)." The letter of the
law further specifies that to "circumvent a technological measure," in this
case, means "to descramble a scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or
otherwise to avoid, bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a technological
measure, without the authority of the copyright owner (17.1201.a.3.A)." A
technological measure that "effectively controls access" is further defined as
a measure that "in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the
application of information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of
the copyright owner, to gain access to the work (17.1201.a.3.B)." For a
literary scholar, that means that, when encountering a text on a digital
device, reading sometimes *must* limit itself to surface phenomena. An attempt
at reading for depth---to discover the implemented terms of a smart contract,
for example---may carry with it a set of official (even criminal)
sanctions.[^ln3-fairuse]

The short history of DMCA "anti-circumvention" provisions is already littered
with ambiguous case law, that the Electronic Frontiers Foundation believes to
have the effect of "stifling a wide range of legitimate activities," "chilling
free expression and academic research," "jeopardizing fair use," and "impeding
innovation [@von_lohmann_unintended_2010]." Several incidents stand out as
particularly relevant to the study of texts and literature. One, a security
researcher exploring the activity of censorship filters on public library
computers was threatened and forced to seek DMCA exemption from the Librarian
of Congress [@fry_circumventing_2009]. Two, a Russian programmer speaking at a
security conference was jailed and detained for several months for developing
software that converts Adobe electronic book files into `.pdf` format, in a
process that could potentially remove embedded digital rights management
protections [@ferullo_major_2004; @mueller_reinventing_2004;
@postigo_information_2010]. Finally, in 2005 Agfa Monotype Corporation took
Adobe Systems to court in a dispute over the Adobe Acrobat "Free Text" tool,
which allowed users to "change text annotations using Plaintiff's TrueType
fonts" without a license [@_agfa_2005; @lipton_c_2009; @von_lohmann_unintended_2010]. If they become precedent, any of these cases could conceivably
be used to physically limit the efficacy of reading, close and distant.

[^ln3-fairuse]: DMCA 1201 provides for a number of complicated exemptions,
which may, under some interpretations, sanction limited use for academic
purposes. See @liu_dmca_2003; @ku_critique_2004; @herman_catch_2005;
@armstrong_digital_2006.

The impact of DMCA and smart contracts on the practices of reading, writing, and
literary analysis is potentially immense. In the language of the DMCA, the
electronic book is not a book at all, but a "data object," in which the modest
copyright symbol gives way to "control layers [@fischer_digital_2003]." An
essay in the *Yale Journal of Law & Technology* explains it this way:

> While e-books and their print counterparts embody essentially identical
> content, from a transactional standpoint they differ considerably. Books are
> tangible goods that can be owned, sold, and passed on without express
> limitation--the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) governs their sale, while
> copyright law protects their content. But despite appearances, Kindle e-books
> are not, according to Amazon, sold at all: they are distributed under
> restrictive license terms, similar to downloaded software
[@seringhaus_e-book_2010, 150].

In these conditions, something like a poem or a novel must relinquish its claim
on the universal concrete. In doing that, it ceases to be literature and
becomes instead a device, firmly tied to its given physical affordances.
Reified as a concrete object, no longer lasting and universal, but rather
ephemeral and contingent, it is subject to the whims of the market. The device
now gains the ability to dynamically adapt itself "to the needs of both the
owner and the user." These adaptations could of course take a benign form, of
the kind suggested in "*Remix: Literatur*," where Michel Chaouli imagines a
device akin to a "literature equalizer," empowering readers to "tune" any given
text to their liking [@chaouli_remix_2009]. Don't really like intensifiers?
Just turn the "adverb knob" down! I hold on to the possibility of building such
a device with Chaouli. In the meantime, existing electronic book software and
hardware devices adapt themselves to the reader in less creative ways. Some
prevent simple copy and paste actions. Others can be used to censor and
surveil. For a textual critic, such instability of medium means analysis cannot
be confined to reading for surface meaning alone. How can close or distant
reading practices persist, when the reading device reconfigures a text
dynamically, to fit individual taste, mood, or politics?[^ln3-modern] Or, when
it simply prevents access to some of the content?

[^ln3-modern]: Note that these effects are not limited to contemporary
literature at all. In purchasing a medieval text, the reader still buys not a
text or a work but a device, which, despite the content being out of copyright
protection, may still restrict access to other, protected layers of device
function.

Smart contracts and DMCA are a conspicuous symptom ailing all text gadgets,
which offer only the illusion of flat textuality. Where a literary scholar
could hope to gleam the machinations of ideology from surface representation in
print, the literary device obscures literal flows of governance. Isomorphic
application design makes the situation worse in giving a measure of similarity
between page and screen (the definition of isomorphism), obscuring material
divergence beneath. The condition is not one of ephemeral, immaterial text, but
one of text burdened with hardware and illegible control structure. The task of
the critic becomes then to restore text to its proper mode of being in the
concrete universal: to give it permanence in the world of ideas and to free it
from its arbitrary material constraint. To lay bare the device literally would
mean to make the mechanisms of naked political control visible. For any sort of
reading to commence, one would first need to peel away the DOMs and the
OSIs---today a task fraught with legal consequence.

### Cuts

"familiar with fabrication" "alienated objects" [@hegel_aesthetics:_1975,
2

The "symbolic" part is important in this context. For example, the universal
computing machine cannot emulate an internal combustion engine, because the
internal combustion engine is not in itself a symbolic machine. However, the
universal computing machine can emulate a symbolic representation of an
internal combustion engine: witness games like *Railroad Tycoon* or 61].
"things not dead or killed by custom" "his own production"

<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->

[^ln3-w3c]: The International Standards Organization (ISO) in the case of OSI,
the Internet Engineering Task Force in the case of TCP/IP, and the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) in the case of the DOM.

