# Chapter 4: Recondite Surfaces, Textual Fissure

I do not trust the text appearing before my eyes. Wendy Hui Kyong Chun calls
magnetic storage the "enduring ephemeral," which "creates unforeseen
degenerative links between humans and machines" [@chun_enduring_2008, 148]. If
the floating gate transistor, where my text now lives, can be called the
enduring ephemeral, I will call my liquid crystal display, where the text
shows itself, fading persistence.[^ln2-gate] This is not to believe that
digital text can transcend its material contexts. Only that it seems to drift
from surface to surface, beyond the field of vision, in ways that erode trust
in the general permanence of the literary system. If we are destined to dwell
on surfaces, I do not know to which surface to attach my attention: the screen
or the floating gate.

In the previous chapters we have encountered the book as a device. I traced
the intellectual roots of the literary artifact to several ideas emerging at
the turn of the twentieth century. We saw it first as a formal device: a
technique for defamiliarizing or making strange habituated metaphors. We then
saw it as a literal device, related to the operation of universal Turing
machines, in which plain text compatible with humans mixes with
machine-compatible control codes. Finally, we began to open the space between
the visible inscription, at the site of its projection, the screen, and the
archived inscription, at the site of storage, the hard drive. Formatting as we
saw operates somewhere in between these two surfaces, transforming one kind of
data structure into another.

Before we begin, I would like to pause for a moment to mark the difficulty in
my answering a simple and yet foundational question: Where does text reside?
In print, one can definitively point to the page and answer: It resides there,
on the page. Computational media complicate our ability to situate the
inscription. One can gesture toward the screen, but without certainty, unsure
if we would encounter it again later, in the same form. The screen remains in
flux. It is a site of temporary projection. The projection emanates from the
storage medium within, passing through multiple filters and transformations on
the way out. We observe the figure stretch before us across at least two sites
of inscription. The sign stretches and splits, expressed in the configuration
of magnetic pulse and circuit state at one end and in the phases of liquid
crystal on the screen at the other. Both locations afford distinct constraints
to reading, writing, and interpretation. Consider that familiar actions like
"reading" and "writing" imply distinctly differing operations depending on the
surface.

Thus when Michael Heim refers to the "ephemeral quality" of the electronic
text or when Pamela McCorduck describes it as "impermanent, flimsy, malleable,
[and] contingent" they identify real-world attributes of digital inscription,
at the site of its projected transcendence. McCorduck tells the story of a
rabbinate court, which, when faced with a law prohibiting observant Jews from
erasing God's name, rule that words on the screen are not to be considered
writing, therefore sanctioning their erasure [@mccorduck_universal_1985, 51;
also quoted @heim_electric_1987, 192]. Conversely, when scholars like Johnna
Drucker, Katherine Hayles, and Matthew Kirschenbaum respond to Heim and
company with hardened materialism, they are also rightly describing properties
of digital inscription, but this time at the site of its archival immanence.
The two schools of thought disagree because they speak neither of the same
phenomenon nor at the same site. The former group highlights the ephemeral,
transcendent qualities of the projected word. The latter foregrounds instead
the "uniquely indelible nature of magnetic storage"
[@kirschenbaum_mechanisms_2008], the "drives, tapes, and disks," the
"fundamental physical support," and the "material substrates of computing"
[@drucker_performative_2013]. In this way, the hard drive and the screen
partition the sign between surface and depth, projection and archive.  At the
site of projection one speaks of texts that are---I've kept a list of
adjectives when reviewing the literature---ephemeral, shimmering, electric,
flimsy, contingent, malleable, impermanent, flowing, transcendent, ghostly,
and radiant. At the site of the archive the language changes to inscriptions
that are enduring, solid, persistent, permanent, indelible, hard, immanent,
lasting, palpable, and concrete.

The seeming immateriality of digital media entails real-world effects: the
costs of replication plummet, for example. Computational text can be copied
effortlessly, with minimal cost, and with near-perfect fidelity.
Hyper-reproducibility of the sort was unthinkable for most of the twentieth
century. The machine has allowed for rapid remediation. Lowered costs of
copying further reduce barriers to access and conveyance. Symbols that adhere
lightly to their medium are easy to store and to transport. Witness the rise
of public knowledge works like search engines that claim to organize "all of
the world's knowledge" and massive open online encyclopedias as a direct
consequence. Such projects unfold by the logic of immateriality, which moves
towards totalizing archives and universal accessibility.[^ln1-google] When
representation appears to weigh nothing, one imagines a weightless totality of
all representation, available immediately and everywhere. The perceived
weightlessness of text has other side-effects as well. For example, a text
that adheres lightly to its medium is also difficult to contain, making
onerous the governance of symbolic representation and weakening traditional
controls like censorship and intellectual property rights.

Despite the appearances, texts cannot be unmoored from their material
foundations. Rather, the inscription splits in two: with one half arising
visibly, a weightless and apparent screen simulation, and the other half,
opaque, etched into the hefty and hidden material contingencies of the device.
The material substrates of computational text likewise carry real-world
affordances and consequences. They are first and foremost hidden from view.
Drives and tapes reside of boxes encased in plastic and aluminum. If only
because they carry electrical current and have the potential to catch fire,
they are regulated. They contain heavy and rare metals, often hazardous if
touched or ingested. Flash cards, memory sticks, solid state storage devices,
and magnetic disk drives contain circuitry to prevent unauthorized access and
to resist tempering. Within them, text intertwines with machine internals,
often sealed hermetically and hermeneutically, in a way that resists human
interpretation. It is inscription not compatible with humans; a literature for
the machines.

Form and content lie flat on the printed page. Print interfaces are paper
thin, we might say. Ink adheres to paper in the way that pixels do not to
screens. Textual fissure complicates the traditional structuralist
distinctions between form and content. The computed inscription occupies at
least two distinct sites, each entailing drastically differing affordances for
reading, writing, and interpretation. Were we to untangle the tightly wound
coil of the circuit, we would find ample distance between the hard drive and
the screen. Some readers measure that distance in inches, as when reading
documents locally for example, stored on their own computer; and in miles when
reading documents remotely, stored on far away "cloud" servers. Where print is
flat, multiply planes of inscription stratify computed text.[^ln2-hayles]

How did this multiplicity come to be? And what effect does it have on the life
of the mind? The purpose of this chapter is to make visible the gap between
the projected sign and the archived inscription. Here, I would like to give a
historical account of a letter's passage from paper to pixel. The narrative
arc of this chapter proceeds in three stages, which I summarize here and
expand upon later.

First, with the initial advance of telecommunications in the telegraph age we
observe the emerging divide between human-readable text and machine-readable
code. Removable storage media like ticker tape and punch card constitute a set
of instructions for a machine, meant to actuate a mechanism which in turn
produces human-legible inscriptions. Unintelligible (to a lay person) control
codes "driving" the machine are thereby mixed with plain text content of
communication. The inscription splits between storage, containing an expanded
character set, and its representation containing only the human alphabets.

Second, where the ticker tape and the punch card were legible without
specialized "reader" devices, the use of magnetic tape submerged the mixed
stream of letters and control codes into an inscrutable substance. For about a
decade in the 1950s and 1960s, machine operators worked "blindly," using
complicated workarounds to verify equivalence between input, storage, and
output. Writing begins to involve multiple "typings," "printings," and
specialized magnetic reading devices to establish the correspondence between
input, storage content, and output of entered text.

Finally, the appearance of Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) displays restores a measure
of legibility lost to magnetic storage media. The familiar sign reemerges on
the screen, but crucially, it now constitutes a simulation of the archived
inscription. Typing a word on keyboard produces one sort of a structure on
tape or disk and another on the screen. The two are related but not
homologous. The lay reader has no means to ensure correspondence between
visible trace and stored mark. An opaque "black box" of a computational device
mediates between reading and writing.

Historical detail needed to bolster the case for the fissure of simulated text
along the above trajectory leads us to a cluster of textual machines. I
propose we keep the following three landmark mechanisms in view as milestones
along our journey: the Controller patented by Hyman Goldberg in 1911; the The
Magnetic Reader introduced by Robert Youngquist and Robert Hanes in 1958; and,
for a lack of a better name, the Time Fob, introduced by Douglas Engelbart in
1968.  The maker of the first of these devices attempts to heal the rift
between human and machine alphabets, inventing a kind of a mechanical punch
card capable of moving minds and levers alike, using an alphabet understood by
humans and machines both, after one and the same inscription. The second
device attempts to give its human operators a glimpse into the hidden world of
magnetic polarities and electric charges. The last of these belongs to what
Peter Denning, a prominent computer scientist has called the "third
generation" of computer systems---an assemblage of storage, input, and output
technologies that continue to shape our contemporary encounter with text
today.[^ln2-denning] Together, these devices tell a story of a fracture and of
a compromise at the center of simulated textuality. What we see cannot always
be what we get. Our inscriptions elude us, even as we learn how to recover a
sense of literacy from physicalities ever retreating, illegible, encrypted,
and opaque.

## A. Perforation

First, a few words about telegraphy in general. The turn of the twentieth
century was a pivotal period in the history of computing and communications.
The advent of programmable media---punch cards and ticker tape---coupled
human-compatible alphabets with machine control code. Reduced to a discrete
and reliably reproducible set of characters, natural languages could now be
converted into the modulation of electrical signal, and further converted into
"artificial languages" meant to orchestrate the conveyance of information.
Language in such a transitive state became more mobile than ever before. It
could be transmitted efficiently across vast distances. The mechanization of
type introduced new control characters into circulation, intended to affect
machine state changes at a distance. Initially, such state changes were
simple: "begin transmission," "sound error bell," "start new line." With time,
these control codes developed into what we now know as programming languages.
At the turn of the century, the language of people and the language of
machines split and entered into the same stream of communications. With the
advent of the automated telegraph, content meant for people was being
routinely intermixed with code meant to control machine devices remotely. Such
remote control capabilities were used for everything from programming radio
stations to advertising billboards and knitting machines [@hough_wired_1931;
@adler_knitting_1933; @casper_remote_1934].

Language compressed and pushed through the wires underwent a number of
transformations. Donald Murray, the inventor of the popular Murray telegraph
alphabet, conceived of telecommunications in terms of time and space.
Advancing a self-professed "metaphysics of telegraph signalling alphabets," he
described spatial writing symbols that "appeal to the eye," and temporal,
"telephonic" signals that "appeal to the ear." Paradoxically, space signals
(like words on a billboard) occupy little space, but persist in time.  "For
instance, a signboard may extend over 10 feet and 100 years," Murray writes.
Time signals are ephemeral by contrast: "a Morse signal in a wire may extend
over half a second and 500 miles" [@murray_setting_1905, 86]. Spatial
distortion of the word presents similar problems for analysis as is its
temporal extension. In print, the reader must mentally assemble consecutive
physical markings to create abstract categories like sentences, paragraphs,
and chapters that are not otherwise accessible to the mind in their entirety.
Like the billboard, the spatial symbol persists through time. The fact that
the digital, electronic sign is not readily visible in its entirety, adds to
the complexity of interpretation. Besides reassembling the sign in time the
reader must also walk the length of the inscription to discern its shape. The
inscription gains a complex new time signature which extends away and beyond
the reader's field of view.

Let us spend a few moments on telegraph alphabets to reconstruct a sense of
the tempo that the machines brought into human communications at the turn of
the twentieth century. As telegraphy spanned national boundaries, agreements
were needed to standardize conventions for equipment and message encoding
[@international_telegraph_union_journal_1899, 82-91]. Such agreements were
handled on a regional, ad-hoc basis until 1865, with the creation of the
International Telegraph Union (ITU). The International Telegraph Conference in
Paris, held between March 1 and May 17 of 1865, adopted, among other things,
the use of a modified Morse code character set, containing 33 Latin letters
(including characters from the French, German, and Spanish alphabets), 10
numbers (0--9), 14 punctuation marks (including a fraction bar), and 10
control codes (including "end of service," "attention," and "error")
[@international_telegraph_union_documents_1865]. In specifying the conversion
tables for the Morse alphabet, the 1865 ITU rules required a silence equal to
three dots (same as one dash) to indicate the space between two letters, and a
silence equivalent to four dots (later changed to seven) to indicate the space
between words.

Although Morse code can be expressed in terms of ones and zeros (binary), it
is technically a ternary code making use of at least three elements: dots,
dashes, and silences of various length. Furthermore, note that in Morse code a
single letter could be expressed as a series of dots and dashes of variable
length: from one dash that stands for letter "t" to six dots that stand for
the number six. The transmission of variable length codes required the
presence of a human operator who could "translate" from natural to machine
language using a "key" which when depressed vertically would complete an
electrical circuit to produce the signal. Writing in 1929 for the journal
*American Speech*, Hervey Brackbill preserved some of the specialized language
associated with Morse code culture. "Morse telegraphy is commonly referred to
as a 'game,' and the operator 'works a wire,'" he wrote. An operator tapping a
key "uses a bug." "The first instruments," Brackbill wrote, "with their long
slender levers and springs, looked very much like a sprawling bug." They have
trade names like "Lighting Bug," "Gold Bug," and "Cootie" (for a small model)
[@brackbill_telegraphers_1929, 287-288]. Operators using "straight keys"
practically achieved speeds upwards of 25--30 words per minute, limited by the
shortest possible length of the smallest transmitted unit (a dot), fixed by
the American and the International Morse Code conventions to 1/24 of a second
in duration.

Around the turn of the twentieth century, companies like Western Electric,
Mecograph, and Vibroplex began manufacturing semi-automatic keys, which made
use of a horizontal switch capable of emitting a rapid succession of dots to
one side of the action, and dashes to the other [@martin_telegraphic_1904;
@boyd_telegraph-key_1916]. A bug was said to "run away" when adjusted for too
high of a speed. The Vibroplex keys would significantly alter the "fist," or
the transmission style of the operator, allowing for speeds that approached 50
words per minute (and above, if not following the minimum signal length
specifications) [@mcnicol_american_1913, 207;
@u.s._bureau_of_labor_statistics_displacement_1932; @halstead_genesis_1949].
Despite the improvements, Morse code was showing its age. Although the
convention stipulated fixed length, the actual length of the silence between
the meaning-carrying units of Morse code could vary greatly with the
vagrancies of the transmitting medium. Cross talk between wires and weather
interferences were common, which meant that communicating in Morse still
required a human operator for efficient ciphering and deciphering of the
transmission. In a long-chain of time-sensitive transmission between the
message and its recipient, the human posed a limiting factor.

Telegraph operators working a "hand sender" commonly developed partial
paralysis of wrist or arm, commonly known as a "glass arm"
[@brackbill_telegraphers_1929;
@u.s._bureau_of_labor_statistics_displacement_1932]. A sender was called a
"ham" or a "bum" when he "fell down" or made errors in sending. To "put
someone under the table" in sender's lingo was to transmit faster that the
receiver ability to transcribe. The "reader" was "burnt up" when he fell
behind. He had to "break," or interrupt the sender to ask for repetition. To
"paste" someone meant to transmit at high speeds to deliberately burn him up
or put him under the table [@brackbill_telegraphers_1929].[^ln4-men]

[^ln4-men]: The operators at the time were all almost exclusively male.

The International Telegraph Conference in Lisbon, held in the summer of 1908,
ratified two additional alphabet standards for international use: Hughes and
Baudot. Both developed in response to the limitations of Morse, allowing for
fully autonomous telegraph operation. The Hughes telegraph, an 1855 design
modification of an 1846 telegraph invented by the American Royal E. House, was
a capricious machine that relied on a tuning mechanism to transmit individual
characters. Inspired by the player piano, the Hughes telegraph even looked
like a piano, complete with a keyboard and a rotating drum, commonly used in
music boxes. The sending device struck a tone which, when transmitted by
electrical current, would initiate the rotation of a similar drum in the
receiving apparatus "at the pleasure of the distant operator," in Hughes's
words. The length of time between the initial synchronization signal and the
struck chord corresponded to a letter, which the machine then printed to tape
using a letter wheel. Hughes referred to the device as a "Compound Magnetic
and Vibrating Printing Instrument," a name that hints at the fragility of the
device. The message became impossible to decipher should the sending drum and
the receiving drum fall out of synchronization [@hughes_improvement_1856;
@hayles_print_2004, 145-147; @noll_evolution_2007, 20-21]. Coordination
between the various machines and their operators was of paramount importance.

The "information density," of the system was further limited by the number and
the size of available cables. Independent developments in communication
technology led to a range of techniques known as "multiplexing"---ways of
sharing the same wire to send multiple messages. Multiplexing at the time fell
into two broad approaches: time-division and pulse-amplitude modulation
[@rowland_multiplex_1901; @hausmann_telegraph_1915]. Pulse-amplitude
modulation involved filling the available space (bandwidth) with simultaneous
signals of different types. Imagine someone speaking loudly and quietly at the
same time into the same channel. In this way, all the loud messages could be
sorted to one side and all the quite ones to the other, effectively utilizing
the whole spectrum of sound.[^ln4-multi] Pulse-amplitude modulation was
difficult to implement initially. Cross-channel noise and device sensitivity
hampered reliable reception and decoding across multiple simultaneous wave
frequencies. Emile Baudot was one of the first engineers to notice that the
prevailing Morse and Hughes telegraph systems failed to make full use of the
time allotted for message transmission. The Hughes code in particular made
extensive use of long silences, which could be condensed to extract more
utility from the channel. Baudot-type time multiplexers utilized synchronized
rotating mechanisms both of the sending and the receiving end, to distribute
units of time among multiple operators. Imagine one operator sending messages
on top of the hour and the other on the bottom. In this way, the receiver can
easily sort messages based on their time signature: all those sent on top of
the hour go into one pile, on the bottom go into another. The same principle
applies condensed down to smaller intervals. A "duplex" printing telegraph, of
the Murray type involved a complicated synchronization device, known as the
"distributor," capable of orchestrating two distinct streams of transmission
along the same channel. Taking turns to transmit to the regular tolling of a
tuning bell, two operators could use the same channel to transmit two distinct
messages. The receiving machine would then separate one message from the other
based on its time signature [@murray_setting_1905].[^ln4-sync]

<!--
![Multiple Printing Telegraph, 1905
[@murray_setting_1905].](images/multiplex.png)
-->

The maintaining of unison became of paramount importance in such multiplexed
systems. The operators of a time-shared device needed to know when it was their
turn to type. The Baudot multiplexer made use of a time- or cadence- "tapper"
mechanism to indicate turns to individual operators, and in some devices,
locking the keyboard to prevent out-of-turn input. In a quadruplex system up to
four operators would engage in an intricate dance of fingers, keys, tappers,
and signals, synchronized by the rotation of the telegraph distributor.

Synchronization was also needed for Morse code devices, to distinguish
non-meaning carrying silence (the receiver is turned off) from the
meaning-carrying one (the receiver pauses to indicate a dot). The receiving
device needed a measure, a duration of silence to differentiate between "dots"
and spaces between words, both indicated by silences of different length. When
the devices went out of sync, or if communication lagged for some reason, the
coherence of the message faltered. Sending and receiving machines had to be
tuned to a cadence of common information exchange. The system of operators,
transmitters, and receivers, was, in aggregate, tuned to a specific but
arbitrary rhythm by which certain messages made sense only in particular (also
arbitrary) units of time. In early telegraphy, these units of time were slower
than natural human time, enough so for the operator to remain idle. Later
systems increased the pace to a rhythm beyond natural human abilities of
comprehension, to a point where human operators could no longer decipher the
signal without machine assistance. In the language of wiremen, the bugs were
"running away with" the whole "game" [@brackbill_telegraphers_1929, 288]. A
human operator examining the signals passing through the wire would find a
jumble of data. In fact, in some sense, this is the definition of data:
information beyond human time, not available to attempts of unmediated, direct
interpretation.

Hundreds of alphabet systems were devised to improve the speed of automated
communications. These tended to evolve from variable-length alphabets like
Morse and Hughes to fixed-length alphabets like Baudot and Murray. The
systematicity of the signal---always the same length, always at the same
time---moved the dial further from natural human languages, which rely on
affect and variation, to artificial codes, which necessitate consistency and
reproducibility. Although the discovery of binary arithmetic rightly belongs
to Gottfried Leibniz, who, influenced by hexagrams in the *I Ching*,
articulated his own system in his *Explication de l'Arithmétique Binaire*
(written in 1679 and published in 1703) [@leibnitz_explication_1703], Bacon
should take the credit for articulating a system for fixed-length binary
encoding. The invention of fixed-length ciphers lies in the sixth book of
Francis Bacon's *De augmentis scientiarum* (*Division of the
Sciences*),[^ln2-bacon] an encyclopedic treatise on the "partition of
sciences" written in the form of a letter to King James in 1623. Book Six of
Bacon's systematic account of the sciences is dedicated to speech, speaking,
writing, grammar (literary and philosophical), poetry (meter and verse), and,
most relevant to our discussion, "the knowledge of ciphers." Here Bacon boasts
of inventing a "highest degree of cipher" that can signify "all in all"
(*omnia per omnia*). Bacon proceeded to describe a "fivefold," "bi-literarie"
alphabet, which encodes each letter of the English language using a
five-letter long string of As and Bs. The letter A, for example, became
"aaaaa." B became "aaaab," C "aaaba," and so on to Z, rendered as "babbb."
"Neither is this a small matter," Bacon wrote:

> These Cypher-Characters have, and may performe: For by this *Art* a way is
> opened, whereby a man may expresse and signifie the intentions of his minde,
> at any distance of place, by objects which may be presented to the eye, an
> accommodated to the eare: provided those objects be capable of a twofold
> difference only; as by Bells, by Trumpets, by Lights and Torches, by the
> report of Muskets, an any instruments of like nature [@bacon_advancement_1987,
> 266].

Writing near two centuries after the advent of the Gutenberg press, Bacon
perceived the essence of telegraphy: to express and to signify the intentions
of the human mind at a distance. The Morse and the Baudot codes paved the way
for the automation of human language. The proliferation of scripts and
alphabets was finally reduced to thirty-two discrete and reproducible
characters. So regularized, type could be converted into electrical signal,
sent over great distances, and used to program machines remotely. The price
for these new affordances given to language was legibility. The translation
between human alphabet and machine transmittable code required first a cadre
of specially trained machine operators, and then specialized equipment which
automated the process of translation itself.

The fixed-length property of Bacon's cipher, later implemented in
the 5-bit Baudot code, signaled the beginning of the modern era of serial
communications [@jennings_annotated_2004]. Baudot and the related Murray
alphabets were designed specifically with automation in mind.[^ln1-murray]
Both being fixed-length alphabets, the Baudot in particular did away with the
"end of character" that separated letters in Morse. Signals could be divided
into letters by count, with every five codes representing a single character.
Additionally, the Murray code was more compact than Morse and especially more
economical than Hughes, which used up to 54 measures of silence to send a
signal representing double quotes.[^ln1-zero] The signal for "zero" in Morse
code occupied 22 measures. By contrast, all Baudot and Murray characters were
a mere five units in length, with the maximum of ten used to switch the
receiving device into "figure" or "capital letter" states (for the total of
ten units) [@murray_setting_1905; @beauchamp_history_2001 380-397].

<!--
![Murray Keyboard Perforator, 1905. Note the QWERTY arrangement of the keys
[@murray_setting_1905].](images/murray-keyboard.png)

![Table of Alphabets, 1901 [@vansize_new_1901, 23].](images/alphabets-vansize.png)
-->

Fixed-length signal alphabets enabled several further innovations, which drove
the wedge further between human and machine modes of communication. Most
significantly for the history of textual fissure, the automated printing
telegraph decoupled the process of encoding from transmission. Fixed-length
encodes could be prepared in advance, with more facility and in volume. The
prepared message could then be fed into a machine without human assistance. At
the turn of the century, Donald Murray, the entrepreneur and the inventor of
the popular Murray telegraph, would write: "It is the object of machine
telegraphy not only to increase the saving of telegraph wire [...] but also to
reduce the labor cost of translation and writing by the use of suitable
machines" [@murray_setting_1905, 557]. Baudot's and Murray's codes were not
only shorter, they were simpler and less error-prone, resulting in less
complicated and more durable devices. As we saw with the Turing's universal
computer, removable tape storage could in fact run the machine, mixing
symbolic control characters with communicative symbols. With the introduction
of mechanised reading and writing techniques, the telegraph diverged from the
telephone to become a device of asynchronous communication, displacing the act
of communication in time as it did in space.  The essence of algorithms lies
in their ability to displace execution: a cooking recipe, for example, allows
novice cooks to follow instructions without the presence of a master chef.
Similarly, displaced communication could happen in absentia, according to
predetermined rules and instructions.

This new generation of printing telegraphs could be "programmed" using
removable storage media, in a way that a player piano is "programmed" to play
a piece by means of a music roll. The printing telegraph decoupled the act of
writing and reading from the act of transmission, similar to the way the
perforated music roll decouples the act of playing the piano from the
performance. Using external storage media like ticker tape and punch cards, a
message could be prepared in advance to be "fed" into the mechanism for
transmission at rates far exceeded the possibilities of hand-operated Morse
telegraphy. Unlike the Morse alphabet which varied in length, the Baudot in
particular fixed the length of the encoding to five spaces or "bits." Five
"off" and "on" spaces allowed for 2^5=32 permutations. After encoding the
common Latin characters, the schema left space for several special "control"
characters. The "character space" could further be expanded by switching the
receiving mechanism into a special "control mode" in which every combination
of five bits represented an individual control character (instead of a
letter).

As Bacon's early writings on the language arts suggest, the roots of
telegraphy lie in cypher-making and cryptography. For this reason, the
encoding of human languages for machine use was always intimately connected to
war-time, diplomatic, and otherwise secret communications. The seemingly
innocuous problem of machine translation was therefore from the beginning
intertwined with the question of access and legibility: who gets to understand
the encoded message and when? For example, the Final Protocol to the Telegraph
Regulations, ratified in Madrid in 1932 by the governments of more than
seventy countries including Germany, Brazil, Cuba, Egypt, Empire d'Ethiopie,
France, Japan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain, United States of America,
and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, included a special provision
delineating the difference between transmitting "plain," and "secret"
language. The protocols further grouped "secret languages" into "code" and
"cypher" categories. The protocol defines "plain language" as words which
present "an intelligible meaning in one or more of the languages authorized
for international telegraph correspondence, each word and each expression
having the meaning normally assigned to it in the language to which it
belongs" [@itu_telegraph_1932, 12]. By contrast, the regulations defined "code
language" to mean messages "composed either of artificial words, or of real
words not used in the meaning normally assigned to them in the language to
which they belong and consequently not forming intelligible phrases"
[@itu_telegraph_1932, 12]. Codes were not permitted to contain more than five
characters and were charged at 6/10th of the agreed tariff rate. Upon request,
the sender of the telegram in code language was required to "produce the code
from which the text or part of the text of the telegram has been compiled"
[@itu_telegraph_1932, 13]. Otherwise, the language was considered to be a
secret "cypher," defined as "groups or series of Arabic figures with a secret
meaning." The terms of the convention binded all participants to agree to
accept and to pass telegrams in plain language through their jurisdictions.
The undesigned also agreed to let secret communications pass in transit
through their territory, although they were not obligated to accept or to help
deliver such messages" [@itu_telegraph_1932, 13].

Automated writing posed the familiar challenge of secret communications anew,
both as a matter of political governance and technological affordance. Machine
code obscured intended meaning. In the context of international
communications, code languages posed a challenge to national security. But
code also presented a technical barrier to participation. The act of encoding
and decoding messages required specialized training, adding cost and reducing
the potential speed of telegraphy down to the pace of human comprehension.

By the late 1920s the "Morse men" were being replaced with more efficient
automated substitutes. By the 1930s, devices variously known as "printer
telegraphs," "teletypewriters," and "teletypes" displaced Morse code
telegraphy as the dominant mode of commercial communication. The monthly
"Labor Review" report published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics in
March of 1932 estimates more than a 50 percent drop in the number of Morse
code operators between the years of 1915 and 1931. Morse operators referred to
the tele-typists on the sending side as "punchers" and on the receiving side
as "printer men."[^ln2-printermen] The printer men responsible for assembling
pages from ticker tape were called "pasters" and sometimes, derisively, as
"paperhangers" [@brackbill_telegraphers_1929]. Where Morse code telegraphy
required the mediation of a human-operator responsible for translating
language into code, teletype automated the process entirely. The operator
could simply enter printed characters into the machine directly, using a
keyboard similar to the typewriter, by that time widely available in business
use. The teletype would then automatically transcode the input into
transmitted signal and then back from the signal onto paper on the receiving
end. Operators did not need to concern themselves with the particulars of
machine code at all. The machine control layer of communication began to
recede out of sight.

![Goldberg's Control Cards [@goldberg_controller_1915].](images/control-2.png)

The concern with legibility of machine code thus emerged during the first few
decades of the twentieth century. One of the inventions attempting to address
the problem of legibility was the Controller, patented by Hyman Goldberg in
1911. "You must acknowledge that this is readable without special training,"
reads the caption to a schematic illustration of the device. "My invention
relates to all controllers," Goldberg writes. The object of Goldberg's
controller was "to provide a mechanism operable by a control sheet which is
legible to every person having sufficient education to enable him to read."
Goldberg illustrates his invention in attaching to his patent "a control sheet
in which the control characters are in the form of the letters of the ordinary
English alphabet" [@goldberg_controller_1915]. Rather than using ticker tape,
Goldberg proposed the use of perforations that while capable of actuating
machine levers also formed letters. To counteract the unintelligibility of
code, Goldberg imagines using cards, perforated in the shape of the English
alphabet. Thus besides carrying human-readable content, Goldberg's cards did
"double duty" to mechanically manipulate the machine's "blocks," "handles,"
"terminal blades," and "plungers" [@goldberg_controller_1915].

On Goldberg's control sheets, the language of machines and the language of
humans coincided on one and the same plane, but only for a time. The
inscription remained visible at the surface of the control sheet, as
perforated figure, punched through the medium. Magnetic tape, mute and
inscrutable, soon replaced punch card and ticker tape as the preferred medium
for data storage.

## B. Magnetic Reading

"Historically unforeseen, barely a thing, software's ghostly presence produces
and defies apprehension," Wendy Chun wrote in her *Programmed Visions*, an
influential monograph that continues to shape the field of software studies.
She quotes several prominent computer scientists and media historians to the
same effect. But what gives software its ephemeral quality?

Embossed onto ticker tape or punched into the card, early software protruded
through the medium. In the age of the telegraph, the biggest barrier to the
comprehension of software was encoding. Morse code and similar alphabet
conventions left a visible mark on the paper. Once the machine alphabet
identified, it could be translated back into natural language using a simple
lookup table. The ticker tape gave the means to translate human language into
electric signal. Once mechanized the signal could be used to communicate and
to control machines remotely. But one could hardly call early programmable
media ephemeral or immaterial. Anecdotes circulate in the digital humanities
circles about Father Roberto Busa, the early pioneer in the field of
computational philology, who in the 1960s carted his punch cards around Italy
on a truck.[^ln2-busa] Codified inscription before its electromagnetic period
was fragile and unwieldy. Just like writing with pen and paper, making an
error on ticker tape entry required cumbersome corrections and sometimes
wholesale re-entry of lines or pages. On the surface of ticker tape, the
inscription still made a strong commitment to the medium. Once committed to
paper it was near-immutable.

Magnetic tape changed the nature of the commitment between inscription and
medium. It gave a temporary home to the word, where the word could be changed
and manipulated before committing to paper. A typist using the new generation
of magnetically-enabled devices could manipulate words "in memory," on a
medium that could easily be erased and rewritten. The magnetic charge adhered
lightly to tape surface. The "light touch" of the magnetic inscription gave
the word its ephemeral quality. But it was also light enough as to be nearly
imperceptible. In applications like law and banking, where the fidelity
between input, storage, and output were absolutely crucial, the illegible
property of magnetic storage posed a significant engineering challenge. After
the advent of teletype, but before the screen, machine-makers employed a
variety of mechanisms to restore a measure of congruence between invisible
magnetic inscription and visible paper representation.

The principles of magnetic recording were developed by Oberlin Smith (among
others), the American engineer who also filed several inventions related to
weaving looms at the end of the nineteenth century. In 1888, inspired by
Edison's mechanical phonograph, Smith made public his experiments with an
"electrical method" of sound recording using a "magnetized cord" (cotton mixed
with hardened steel dust) as a recording medium. These experiments were later
put into practice by Valdemar Poulsen of Denmark, who patented several
influential designs for a magnetic wire recorder [@smith_possible_1888;
@poulsen_method_1900; @engel_1888-1988_1988; @thiele_magnetic_1988;
@daniel_magnetic_1998; @vasic_coding_2004].

Magnetic recording on wire or plastic tape offered several advantages over
mechanical perforation. Tape was more durable than paper; it could fit more
information per square inch; and, most importantly, it was reusable. "One of
the important advantages of magnetic recording is that the record may be
erased if desired, and a new record made in its place," Marvin Camras, a
physicist with the Armour Research Foundation, wrote in 1948
[@camras_magnetic_1948, 505]. At the turn of the century, most of the
developments in magnetic storage were aimed at sound recording. The use of
magnetic medium for the storage of data did not take off in earnest until the
1950s [@dee_magnetic_2008, 1775]. Yet some of the early developers of
electro-magnetic storage and recording technology already conceived of their
work as having an impact on knowledge production broadly and on the history of
the book in particular. Addressing the Franklin Institute on December 16th of
1908 Charles Fankhauser, the inventor of the electromagnetic "telegraphone,"
said the following:

> To transport human speech over a distance of one thousand miles is a
> wonderful achievement. How much more wonderful, then, is the achievement
> that makes possible [...] its storage at the receiving end, so that the
> exact sentence, the exact intonation of the voice, the exact timbre may be
> reproduced over and over again, an endless number of times"
> [@fankhauser_telegraphone_1909, 39]

Comparing magnetic recording to the invention of the Gutenberg press,
Fankhauser went on to say:

> It is my belief that what type has been to the spoken word, the telegraphone
> will be to the electrically transmitted word [...] As printing spread
> learning and civilization among the peoples of the earth and influenced
> knowledge and intercourse among men, so I believe the telegraphone will
> influence and spread electrical communication among men"
> [@fankhauser_telegraphone_1909, 40].

In that speech, Fankhauser laments what he calls the "evanescence" of
telegraph and telephone communications. The telephone fails to preserve "an
authentic record of the conversion over the wire"
[@fankhauser_telegraphone_1909, 40]. Fankhauser imagines his telegraphone in
use by "the sick, the infirm, and the aged:"

> A book can be read to the sightless or the invalid by the machine, while the
> patient lies in bed. Lectures, concerts, recitations---what one wishes, may
> be had at will. Skilled readers or expert elocution teachers could be
> employed to read into the wires entire libraries
> [@fankhauser_telegraphone_1909, 44].

Anticipating the popularity of twenty-first century audio media formats like
the podcast and the audio book, Fankhauser imagines "tired and jaded" workers
who "sooth themselves into a state of restfulness" by listening to their
favorite authors. Poulsen's "electric writing" will finally emerge "as clear
and as distinct as the writing by hand, an absolutely legal and conclusive
record," Fankhauser concludes [@fankhauser_telegraphone_1909, 41].

In the first decade of the twentieth century, Fankhauser imagined magnetic
storage as an audio format, combining the best of telegraphy and telephony in
one device. For the purposes of data storage, magnetic recording technology
did not mature until the 1950s, when advances in composite plastics made it
possible to manufacture tape cheaper and more durable than its paper
alternatives. The state of the art relay calculator commissioned by the Bureau
of Ordinance of the Navy Department in 1944 and built by the Harvard
Computation laboratory in 1947 still made use of standard issue telegraph
"tape readers and punchers," adapted for computation with the aid of engineers
from Western Union Telegraph Company [@staff_description_1949,
1-40].[^ln2-punch] The relay calculator was equipped with a number of Teletype
Model 12A tape readers and Model 10B perforators, using 11/16-inch wide paper
tape, partitioned into "five intelligence holes." To give you a sense of the
machine's storage capacity, each quantity entered for computation took up
thirteen lines of code [@staff_description_1949, 30]. The readers and punches
were capable of running at 600 operations per minute. Four Model 15
Page-Printers gave the means to compare the printed characters with the digits
stored in the ticker tape-based controlling print register. In this setup, the
numerical inscription was therefore already split between input and output
channels: with input stored on ticker tape and output on the printed page for
verification.

The Mark III Calculator which followed the Harvard Computation Laboratory's
earlier efforts was likewise commissioned by the Navy's Bureau of Ordinance.
It was completed in 1950. The "organization" (we would say "architecture"
today) of Mark III jettisoned tape in favor of multiple magnetic drums and a
system of reel-to-reel tape recorders. The drums, limited in their storage
capacity, revolved at much faster speeds than tape. They were used for fast,
temporary, internal storage. The surface of the magnetic drums was coated with
a "thin film composed of finely divided magnetic oxides of iron suspended in a
plastic lacquer, and applied to the drums with an artist's air brush"
[@staff_description_1952, 1]. Mark III employed twenty-five such drums,
rotating at 6900 rpm and each capable of storing 240 binary digits.

[^ln3-multi]: Technical literature makes a distinction between space- and
frequency- division multiplexing. On some level, space-division multiplexing
simply involves the splitting of a signal into multiple physical channels
(wires). Frequency-division better "fills" the space of a single channel.

In addition to the fast "internal storage" drums, the "floor plan" included
eight slow "external storage" tape-read mechanisms. Tape was slower than drums
but cheaper and easily extensible to multiple reels, approaching the ideals of
the Turing device, which called for "infinite tape." In practice, the tape was
not infinite, but merely long enough to answer the needs of military
computation. By contrast to stationary drums built into the machine, tape was
portable. Operators could prepare tape in advance, in a different room, at the
alloted Instructional Tape Preparation Table. The information on tape would
then be transferred to a slow moving magnetic drum, and, when the two drums
matched in speed, transferred again to the fast-moving internal drum for data
calculation, machine sequencing, and control. Mark III was further equipped
with five printers "for presenting computed results in a form suitable for
publication." The printers were capable of determining the "number of digits
to be printed, the intercolumnar and interlinear spacing, and other items
related to the typography of the printed page" [@staff_description_1952,
1-40].

Data was recorded on tape using binary numerical notation. To enter the number
onto tape, the operator sat at the "numerical tape preparation table," another
piece of furniture separate from the main machine. The data was stored on tape
along two channels, running the length of the tape. The operator entered each
number twice, first into Channel A and then into Channel B. This was done to
prevent errors, since the operator worked blindly, without being able to see
whether the intended mark registered properly upon first entry. An error bell
would sound when the first quantity did not match the second, in which case
the operator would have to reenter the mismatched digits
[@staff_description_1952, 143-88]. To further "ensure completely reliable
results" the operator could use one of the five attached Underwood Electric
teletypes to print all of the tape's columns and confirm visually.

I cover significant technical detail throughout the chapter to make sure that
the contemporary reader understands what I describe as the " textual fissure"
or the "multiple locations of the inscription" not as a metaphor, but
literally. Where the typewriter or the hole punch transfered the inscription
from keyboard to paper directly, at the stroke of hammer and key, early
electromagnetic devices compounded the inscription across multiple surfaces.
The movement of the computed sign necessitated manifold "phase transitions"
between media: from one channel of the tape to another, from tape to drum,
from a slow drum to a fast one, and from drum and tape to paper. Where before,
on ticker tape, the inscription remained visible, at least before it entered
the wires as electrical signal, it now disappeared from view soon after key
press. Submerged under magnetic surface inscriptions multiply, diffuse, and
resist direct observation. The computed sign undergoes a number of changes in
the process of displacement in time and in space. When using the Mark III or
similar tape-driven devices an operator could prepare a reel of tape today,
process it tomorrow, derive the necessary calculations and transmit them the
day after. The continual fissure of the inscription across surfaces, from one
format into another in effect constitutes what we mean by the "processing"
part of "word processing." Telegraphy entwined symbol and machine control,
making machine alphabets incomprehensible to a lay reader. Magnetic storage
further stretched the inscription across multiple recording surfaces,
concealing it in the process.

The potential incongruence between covert data storage and its apparent
representation posed a problem in the decades preceding the advent of screen
simulation. In a patent filed in 1954 on the behalf of the Borroughs
Corporation of Detroit, Michigan, Herman Epstein and Frank Innes describe an
"electrographic printer," involving an "electrical method and apparatus for
making electrostatic images on a dielectric surface by electrical means which
may be rendered permanently visible" [@epstein_electrographic_1961, 1]. The
electrographic printer anticipated the modern photocopier. Rather than storing
data in code, the inventors imagined forming letter shapes directly on the
surface of magnetic tape, in a kind of a magnetic tracing of each character. A
small printing head would convert binary input into a five-by-seven grid of
electromagnetic charges, capable of rendering the English alphabet. The
magnetic image could then be combined with a recording medium having the
"correct physical properties to adhere to the electrostatic latent images"
[@epstein_electrographic_1961, 2]. A light dusting of powder ink would reveal
the hidden magnetic image.

!["Images formed by a negative voltage," from Electrographic Printer by
Epstein and Innes
[@epstein_electrographic_1961]](images/magnetic-alphabet-epstein.png)

Advances in magnetic storage in the field of audio recording and in
supercomputer applications like the Mark III found their way into the business
and home offices a decade later, in the 1960s. In 1964, IBM combined magnetic
tape storage with its *Selectric* line of electric typewriters. The Selectric
typewriter is notable because it was one of the first typewriters to transform
the mechanical action of the keyboard into binary electric signal. For this
reason, it could serve as an input device for a variety of early computing
platforms. Combined with magnetic tape storage into the MT/ST unit, the
Selectric typewriter become one of the first true word processors
[@eisenberg_word_1992]. Word processing, in contemporary sense, identifies the
ability to record strokes and to print them onto paper in separate stages.
Temporary magnetic media storage is what enabled the gap between input and
output of text.

Built on a simpler architecture than its supercomputer cousins, the MT/ST used
a single tape read and write mechanism. An advertisement in the American Bar
Association circa 1968 calls it the $10,000 typewriter that is "worth every
penny." Before, the typist would have to stop and erase every mistake, the
copy reads. But with IBM MT/ST it is possible to "backspace, retype, and keep
going." The mistake is changed on magnetic tape, "where all typing is recorded
and played back correctly at incredible speed" [@association_aba_1966, 998].
But just as it was with the Mark III, information stored on magnetic tape was
absolutely invisible to the typist. At the time, the only way to verify the
magnetic inscription was to print it out.

What was gained in the freeing of text from the confines of immutable media
like ink and paper, was gotten at the price of legibility. Encoding used by
the IBM MT/ST typewriter retained the familiar underlying structure of a 7-bit
encoding scheme, not dissimilar from Bacon's secret writing. But on tape, the
encoding scheme ceased to be recoverable by the naked eye. The inscription lay
literally beyond human sense. On tape, "magnetic domains" and "polarities"
took place of visible albeit encoded alphabets.[^ln2-magnet] The developers of
these early systems recognized the problem of congruence between the visible
and the invisible sign. The machine operator needed to ensure that the input
correspond to the stored quantity. But the only way to check the stored
quantity was to once again transform it into another inscription. Direct
access to the site of storage was near-impossible.

The engineers working on Mark III attempted to address the problem of
congruence by asking the operator to input quantities twice. Other solutions
included making the magnetic mark more apparent. For example, the "magnetic
reader" patented by Robert Youngquist and Robert Hanes in 1962 promised a
"device for visual observation of magnetic symbols recorded on a magnetic
recording medium in tape or sheet form." Youngquist and Hanes wrote:

> Magnetic recording tape is often criticized because the recorded signals are
> invisible, and the criticism has been strong enough to deny it certain
> important markets. For example, this has been a major factor in hampering
> sales efforts at substituting magnetic recording tape and card equipment for
> punched tape and card equipment which presently is dominant in automatic
> digital data--handling systems. Although magnetic recording devices are
> faster and more troublefree, potential customers have often balked at losing
> the ability to check recorded information visually. It has been suggested
> that the information be printed in ink alongside the magnetic signals, but
> this vitiates major competitive advantages of magnetic recording sheet
> material, e.g., ease in correction, economy in reuse, simplicity of
> equipment, compactness of recorded data, etc." [@youngquist_magnetic_1961,
> 1].

The magnetic reader comprised a flat box that resembles a book. Youngquist and
Hanes proposed to fill the cover plate of their box with a transparent liquid
to host "visible, weakly ferromagnetic crystals." When sandwiched between the
two plates, a piece of magnetic tape would activate the crystals to align with
the embedded inscription. In this way, the top plate would reveal the "visible
outlines" of the underlying magnetic symbol [@youngquist_magnetic_1961, 1].

!["The positioning of a magnetic recording card for visual observation of
symbols recorded thereon," from [@youngquist_magnetic_1961,
1]](images/youngquist.png)

Yet the problem remained. Data arrangement along the length of the narrow
magnetic tape had a fundamentally differing structure from data arranged on a
broad sheet of paper. The next generation of IBM Magnetic Selectric
typewriters added a "composer" control unit to further address that difference.
The IBM Composer could restore some of the formatting lost in the transition
between paper and magnet. It added capabilities for margin control and text
justification. The original IBM Composer unit achieved margin justification
(its chief innovation over the typewriter) by asking the operator to type each
line twice: "one rough typing to determine what a line would contain, and a
second justified typing" [@morgan_ibm_1968, 69]. After the "first typing," an
indicator mechanism helped the operator calculate the variable spacing needed
to achieve paragraph justification. The formatting and content of each line
thus required separate input passes to achieve the desired result.

+-------------------+---------------+-------------------------------+
|  Model            | Year          | Technologies                  |
+===================+===============+===============================+
| Selectric         |               | - electric                    |
| Typewriter        | 1961          | - binary code                 |
|                   |               | - replaceable font element    |
+-------------------+---------------+-------------------------------+
| MT/ST             | 1964          | - magnetic tape               |
|                   |               | - Selectric typewriter        |
+-------------------+---------------+-------------------------------+
| Selectric         | 1966          | - justification               |
| Composer          |               | - spacing                     |
|                   |               | - typesetting                 |
+-------------------+---------------+-------------------------------+
| MT/SC             | 1968          | - magnetic tape               |
|                   |               | - Selectric typewriter        |
|                   |               | - Composer                    |
+-------------------+---------------+-------------------------------+
| MC/ST             | 1969          | - magnetic card               |
|                   |               | - Selectric typewriter        |
+-------------------+---------------+-------------------------------+

Table: Generations of IBM Selectric line of word processors.

IBM's Magnetic Tape Selectric Composer (MT/SC) combined the typing
capabilities of the Selectric line of typewriters, magnetic tape from the
MT/ST line, and the formatting capabilities of the Composer. Rather than
having the operator type each line twice, the MT/SC system printed the entered
text twice: once on the "input station printout" which showed both the content
and the control codes printed in red ink, and the second time as the final
"Composer output" printout, which presented the final typeset copy. The output
operator would still have to intervene manually, however, to make decisions
about paper loading, type font changes, and hyphenation decisions. What was
once a monolithic unit on the page was thereby systematically separated into
several distinct layers in the process of composition and decomposition.

Like other devices of this generation, the IBM MT/SC suffered from the problem
of invisible storage. Error checking on paper via multiple printouts was aided
by a control panel consisting of "11 display lights." The configuration of
lights could be used to "peek" at the underlying data storage during otherwise
blind entry. In an attempt to achieve greater congruence between visible data
and data archived on the magnetic medium, IBM briefly explored the idea of
using magnetic cards instead of tape. Where on tape information had to be
stored serially, as one long column of codes, on a magnetic card the spatial
relation between elements could be preserved. The 1968 patent for "Data
Reading, Recording, and Positioning System" describes a method for arranging
information on such a card "recording and playback system which accurately
positions each character recorded relative to each previous character
recorded" [@clancy_data_1970, 1]. In 1969 IBM introduced magnetic card storage
units into its Selectric Composer line of word processors. Fredrick May, whose
name often appears on word processing related patents form this period, would
later reflect on magnetic cards, writing that a "major reason for the choice
of a magnetic card for the recording of medium was the simple relationship
that could be maintained between a typed page and a recorded card"
[@may_ibm_1981, 743]. The card could be thought of as a miniature page, making
the magnetic card a "unit of record of storage of a typed page"
[@may_ibm_1981, 743].

![IBM Mag Card II, introduced in 1969 for use in the Magnetic Card/Selectric
Typewriter (MC/ST) in 1969. "A simple relationship could be maintained between
a typed page and a recorded card" [@may_ibm_1981, 744]. Image by Pointillist
under GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2.](images/ibm-card.png)

The Mag Card soon passed from use due to its limited storage capabilities and
a capricious feeding mechanism. The card offered a measure of topographic
similarity between page and stored signal. Yet, like all magnetic media it
remained resistant to direct observation. Speaking at the 1967 symposium on
electronic composition in printing, Jon Haley, staff director of the
Congressional Joint Committee on printing, put it this way: "compromises with
legibility [...] had been made for the sake of pure speed in composition and
dissemination of the end product [@technology_electronic_1967, 48]. The
automation of type made the word faster. The magnetic storage made it lighter
and more compact. It allowed for processing before commitment to a paper
medium. But these gains were made at the cost of legibility. The move to
magnetic and later solid state storage media would have tremendous social and
political consequences for the republic of letters. Magnetic storage reduced
the costs of copying, in a sense freeing the word from its more permanent
material confines, creating the illusion of ephemerality. Yet, the material
properties of magnetic tape itself continued to prevent direct access. They
separated readers into those able to effect the mixture of content and control
that shapes the literary encounter and those who observed passively, at the
shimmering surface of archival projection.

The structure of textual artifacts---from a simple leaflet to a novel in
multiple volumes---has remained remarkably stable since the invention of
movable type. One rarely finds a sentence that spans several paragraphs, for
example. Nor would a contemporary reader expect to find pages of different
length in the same tome.  Long-standing historical conventions guide the
production of printed text.  Semantic and decorative units on a page exist
within a strict hierarchy, so familiar to us as to become almost invisible. No
book of serious non-fiction will be typeset in cursive font, for example. But
unless something out of the ordinary attracts our attention, readers will tend
to gloss the "inconsequential" details of formatting in favor of content. The
material contexts of a well designed book fade from view during reading.

For a few decades after the advent of magnetic storage media but before screen
technology, the outward shape of the sign disappeared altogether. It is
difficult to fathom now, but at the time after the introduction of magnetic
tape in the 1960s but before the wide-spread advent of cathode ray tube
displays in the 1980s, the typewriter operator and the computer programmer
often manipulated text blindly. Where the page or the punch card gave
immediate visual feedback, the magnetic tape was inscrutable. The word could
be "processed" or altered with codes that controlled attributes like indent
size or justification *before* committing ink to paper. A paper describing the
popular IBM Magnetic Tape Selectric Typewriter (MT/ST) introduced in 1964
describes the novelty of the system as follows:

> It could be emphasized for the first time that the typist could type at
> "rough draft" speed, "backspace and strike over" errors, and not worry about
> the pressure of mistakes made at the end of the page [@may_ibm_1981, 742].

The IBM Magnetic Tape Selectric Composer (MT/SC) further added a "programmable
control" unit to separate the input from the output. Final printing would be
accomplished by:

> mounting the original tape and the correction tape, if any, on the
> two-station reader output unit, setting the pitch, leading, impression
> control and dead key space of the composer unit to the desired values, and
> entering set-up instructions on the console control (e.g., one-station or
> two-station tape read, depending on whether the correction tape is present;
> line count instructions for the format control and space to be left for
> pictures, etc.; special format instructions; and any required control codes
> known to be omitted from the input tape. During printing, the operator
> changes type elements when necessary, loads paper as required, and makes and
> enters hyphenation decisions if justified copy is being printed
> [@bishop_development_1968, 382].

The tape unit and the control unit thus intervene between the keyboard and the
printed page. The "final printing" combines roughly the "prepared copy" with
"control and reference codes" and "printer output" [@bishop_development_1968;
@may_ibm_1981]. The materials from the time often speak of three distinct
human operators that could be responsible for each stage of the production:
one entering the copy, one specifying the control codes, and one responsible
for handling the paper output. The machine operators could hypothetically work
in isolation from one another. The typist would see only elements of the copy;
the typesetter or the controller only formatting and control codes; and the
printer only the interpolated results.

<!--
!["Block diagram of MT/SC system" @bishop_development_1968, 381.](images/mt-sc.png)
-->

Researchers working on these early IBM word processing machines saw the
separation of print into such distinct strata as one of their major
contributions to the history of print writ large. A consultant writing for the
*IBM Journal* in 1968 imagines the "evolution of composition" that proceeded
from handwriting, to wood engraving, movable type, letterpress, and, finally,
to the IBM MT/SC. "The IBM Selectric Composer provides a new approach to the
printing process in this evolution," he writes. He concludes to say that the
IBM Composer finally empowers the writer to once again write books "without
the assistance of specialists" [@frutiger_ibm_1968, 10]. Marketing language
aside, the separation of the sign from its immediate material contexts
constituted a major milestone in the history of writing and textuality.

## C. Restored Sight

In decoupling input and output, magnetic storage and solid state media afford
the injection of time and space, in arbitrary intervals, between the process
of inscription and comprehension. Content coupled with control code and
encoded into an electrical charge sinks beneath the matte surface of an
inscrutable medium. The final movement in the textual fissure restores a sense
of immediacy into the process of inscription through screen projection. Text,
invisible in its material substratum, reappears on the screen, but, crucially,
the correspondence between the archived inscription and its projected image
can no longer be guaranteed. The very admixture of formatting and control code
which we saw emerge in the first stage of the movement towards simulation
remains out of sight. The condition of simulated text is as liberating as it
is perilous: liberating, because loosely coupled to their material substratum
texts become both more fluid and more portable; and perilous because the flows
of power and control can now be submerged beneath the visible surface of the
screen. Plainly put, the systematic barriers to copying, sharing, exchanging,
editing, remixing, and disseminating texts are reduced to a minimum, while the
barriers to comprehension increase.

I propose to treat the year 1968 as the year in which the contemporary textual
condition took its present, completed form. Subsequent generations of
computational devices would change in terms of size, speed, and ubiquity. But
they also retain essentially the same architecture, comprising (i)
programmable storage media; (ii) internal memory, magnetic, solid or other
types of external storage; and (iii) keyboards and screen displays for
human-machine interaction. The addition of the screen completed the circuit
between human-initiated input and human-legible output. The screen "opened a
window" onto the submerged world of magnetic storage.

In theory, the screen updates multiple times per second to give an accurate
up-to-the moment view of the system's internal states, which are otherwise
opaque and illegible. In practice, the machine operator must have trust in the
design of the system to render its own internal states faithfully. And because
system control characters grew from several machine instructions in the first
decades of the twentieth century to complicated and infinitely extensible
"Turing-complete" programming languages by the 1950s, much of the systems
internals are habitually hidden from the average machine user. For
convenience's sake, and later for loftier reasons like intellectual rights
management and system security, the user is given access to partial, simulated
representations of machine internals. Such compromise informs the architecture
of most computer systems, from digital cameras to mobile phones, and to
electronic book readers.

On December 9, 1968 Douglas Engelbart, then founder and primary investigator
at the NASA- and ARPA-funded Augmentation Research Center lab at the Stanford
Research Institute, gave what later became known colloquially as "the mother
of all demos" before the audience of roughly one thousand or so computer
professionals attending the Joint Computer Conference held at the Convention
Center in San Francisco [@rogers_demo_2005; @tweney_mother_2008]. The flyer
advertising the event described it as follows:

> This session is entirely devoted to a presentation by Dr. Engelbart on a
> computer-based, interactive, multiconsole display system which is being
> developed at Stanford Research Institute under the sponsorship of ARPA, NASA
> and RADC. The system is being used as an experimental laboratory for
> investigating principles by which interactive computer aids can augment
> intellectual capability. The techniques which are being described will,
> themselves, be used to augment the presentation. The session will use an
> on-line, closed circuit television hook-up to the SRI computing system in
> Menlo Park. Following the presentation remote terminals to the system, in
> operation, may be viewed during the remainder of the conference in a special
> room set aside for that purpose [@engelbart_doug_1968].

The demo announced the arrival of almost every technology prophesied by
Vannevar Bush in his influential 1945 piece for *The Atlantic*, "As We May
Think" [@bush_as_1945]. During his one hour or so lecture, Engelbart features
functional  prototypes of the following: graphical user interfaces, video
conferencing, remote camera monitoring, links and hypertext, version control,
text search, image manipulation, windows-based user interfaces, digital
slides, networked machines, mouse, stylus, and joystick inputs, and "what you
see is what you get" (WYSIWYG) word processing.

In his report to NASA, the agency which sponsored the research, Engelbart
described his lab as a group of scientists "developing an experimental
laboratory around an interactive, multiconsole computer-display system" and
"working to learn the principles by which interactive computer aids can
augment the intellectual capability of the subjects" [@engelbart_human_1969,
1]. Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) displays were central to this research mission. In
one of many patents that came out of his "intellect augmentation" laboratory,
Engelbart pictured the "display system" as a workstation that combines a
typewriter, a CRT screen, and a mouse. The patent schematics show the
workstation in action, with the words "NOW IS THE TIME FOB" prominently
displayed on the screen. Although Engelbart did not explain the meaning of the
message, the system's user is evidently in the process of editing a sentence
and about to correct the nonsensical FOB into a FOR.[^ln2-timefob]

!["NOW IS THE TIME FOB." Schematics for a "display system"
[@engelbart_x-y_1970].](images/engel.png)

Commenting on the use of "visual display systems" for human-computer
interaction, Engelbart writes:

> One of the potentially most promising means for delivering and receiving
> information to and from digital computers involves the display of computer
> outputs as visual representation on a cathode ray tube and the alternation
> of the display by human operator in order to deliver instructions to the
> computer" [@engelbart_x-y_1970].

The short-lived screenless word processors of the early 1960s (like the IBM
MT/ST) necessitated the cognitively arduous task of continuously keeping the
underlying document structure in the mind's eye. The screen removes that
burden by reconstructing the document structure topographically, along the
*x/y* axes. It restores a sense of apparent and organized space to data stored
in ad-hoc and impalpable structures along the surface of then magnetic storage
and now solid state medium. The contemporary "digital" document may resemble a
page on the screen, but beneath it, it is a jumble of bits, split into the
various regions of internal memory. The screen attempts to restore unity. It
recombines the bits to once again produce something resembling a paragraph, a
page, or a book, recreating some of the natural affordances of print, like
"turning the page," "writing on the margins, and "bookmarking." But these
actions are mere simulations of paper formats. Even as it gives the machine
operator some familiar visual cues guided by the physics of paper and ink, the
simulation itself follows the laws of physics that govern magnets and
electricity. The simulated text does not transcend matter, it merely
dissembles, concealing most of its material properties while simulating
others. The act of continual dissemblage---one medium imitating the
other---gives rise to the ephemeral illusion, by which pages fade in and out
of sight, paper folds in improbable ways, and words glide effortlessly between
registers of copy and paste.

Humans reading and writing on magnetic media with the aid of the screen for
the first time reported a feeling of freedom and liberation from paper. An
anonymous account included in Engelbart's report offers the following
phenomenological self-assessment:[^ln2-follow]

```
    1B2B1 "To accommodate and preserve a thought or
    piece of information that isn't related to the work
    of the moment, one can very quickly and easily
    insert a note within the structure of a file at such
    a place that it will nether get in the way nor get
    lost.

    1B2B2 "Later, working in another part of the file,
    he can almost instantly (e.g. within two seconds)
    return to the place where he temporarily is storing
    such notes, to modify or add to any of them.

    1B2B3 "As any such miscellaneous thought develops,
    it is easy (and delightful) to reshape the structure
    and content of its discussion material.
```

In other words, what the typist previously perceived as an ordered and
continuous activity of writing one word after the other, could now be
performed in a more disjointed way. The typist describes deriving delight from
shaping physical paragraph structure in ways that more closely match the
perception of his own mental activity. For the typist habituated to
typewriters, the addition of the screen restored some of the facility with the
word lost to the rigid mechanism that forced sequential, line by line entry.
The author could now think two thoughts at the same time if you will,
documenting both at different parts of the file as one would on a sketch pad
or in a notebook. The author suggests that this new way asynchronous and
multi-threaded way of writing better resembles the natural, spontaneous
operation of the human mind.

Interested in documenting such empirical phenomenological reflections of
system use, Engelbart recorded what must count as some the most evocative
passages to appear on the pages of a NASA technical report. The "Results and
Discussion" section of the report contain the following anonymous
contemplation:

```
1B4 "I find that I can express myself better, if I can
make all the little changes and experiments with wording
and structure as they occur to me." [Here the user
experiments a little with using structural decomposition
of a complex sentence.]
```

A decomposition follows indeed, as the author deviates dramatically from the
conventions of a technical report. Numbered passages along with unexpected
enjambment heighten the staccato quality of the prose, which at times reaches
towards the lyric:

```
    1B4A "I find that I write faster and more freely,

        1B4A1 "pouring thoughts and trial words on the
        screen with much less inhibition,

        1B4A2 "finding it easy to repair mistakes or wrong
        choices

            1B4A22 "so while capturing a thought I don't
            have to inhibit the outpouring of thought and
            action to do it with particular correctness,

        1B4A3 "finding that several trials at the right
        wording can be done very quickly

            1B4A3A "so I can experiment, easily take a look
            and see how a new version strikes me--and often
            the first unworried attempt at a way to express
            something turn out to be satisfactory, or at
            least to require only minor touch up.

        1B4A4 "Finding that where I might otherwise
        hesitate in search of the right word, I now pour out
        a succession of potentially appropriate words,
        leaving them all the while the rest of the
        statement takes shape. Then I select from among
        them, or replace them all, or else merely change the
        list a it and wait for a later movement of the
        spirit.
```

When input and output coincide in time, as they do on paper, mistakes are
costly. Once inscribed, the sign gains permanence. It is difficult to emend.
An eraser of some sort can help remove a layer of physical material.
Alternatively, writers use white ink to restore the writing surface.
Engelbart's anonymous subject reports the feeling of freedom from such
commitment to a physical medium. He or she can simply "backspace" and start
over.

The previous generation of word processors allowed for dynamic erasure, but
with the introduction of the screen the writer can now follow along and "see"
the changes in real time. Freed, seemingly, from the immediate and permanent
commitment to a medium like paper or punch card writing "comes easy" and
"uninhibited." Instead of carefully selecting the right words for the final
draft the writer "pours" them all out and then "selects" the ones that seem
appropriate, without hesitation. The highly hierarchical and blocky paragraph
structure, along with its repetitive refrain, "finding" and "I find that,"
gives the prose a hypnotic drive forward. The cadence matches the reported
experience of liberation.

Anonymous continues to report:

```
    1B4B "I find that,

        1B4B1 "being much more aware of

            1B4B1A "the relationships among the phrases of a
            sentence,

            1B4B1B "among the statements of a list,

            1B4B1C "and among the various level and members
            of a branch,

        1B4B2 "being able

            1B4B2A "to view them in different ways,

            1B4B2B "to rearrange them easily,

            1B4B2C "to experiment with certain special
            portrayals,

                1B4B2C1 "not available easily in unstructured data

                1B4B2C2 "or usable without the CRT display,

        1B4B3 "and being aware that

            1B4B3A "I can (and am seeking to) develop still
            further special conventions and computer aids

            1B4B3B "to make even more of this available and
            easy,

        1B4B4 "all tend to increase

            1B4B4A "my interest and experimentation

            1B4B4B "and my conviction that this is but a
            peek at what is to come soon.
```

The passages appear too contrived to be spontaneous admissions of
phenomenological experience. Despite their experimental structure, the words
advance key elements of Engelbart's research program, which aimed to develop
new data structures in combination with new ways of displaying them. Yet I
cannot help but be carried away by the fluency of the prose and by the sheer
audacity of the project.

Engelbart's research into intellect augmentation creates tools that augment
research. In an image that evokes Baron Münchhausen pulling himself out of a
swamp by his own bootstraps, Engelbart describes the methodology employed by
his lab as "bootstrapping." Bootstrapping for Engelbart involves the recursive
strategy of "developing tools and techniques" to develop better tools and
techniques. The "tangible product" of such an activity is "a constantly
improving augmentation system for use in developing and studying augmentation
systems." It is an appealing vision, but only as long as it remains recursive.
The lab benefits from creating its own tools and methods. Engelbart also
believes that tools and methods emanating from his research have a more
universal appeal. He hopes that his system "can be transferred---as a whole or
by pieces of concept, principle and technique---to help others develop
augmentation systems for many other disciplines and activities." Undoubtedly,
Engelbart's ideas about intellect augmentation have had a broad impact on
knowledge work across disciplines. However, Engelbart's vision loses the
property of self determination in the transfer. It no longer involves a
community pulling itself by the bootstraps. Rather it is augmentation enforced
from without, adhering to values and principles no longer comprehensible to
the entity being augmented.

Contemporary word processors enable us to drag and drop passages with
unprecedented facility. But readers and writers hardly comprise a
"bootstrapping community" of their own, of the kind Engelbart imagined for his
laboratory peers. The contemporary writer is bootstrapped passively to
whatever prevailing vision of intellect augmentation. The very discussion
about what "intellect augmentation" means, passes from view as the tools of
augmentation become a commodity. They are beyond reading or critique as they
are no longer legible to the community of readers and writers.

To bring his system into being, Engelbart convened a bootstrap community which
through recursive self-improvement could lift itself up towards a smarter,
more efficient, more human way of doing research. To accomplish their task,
the group crafted novel instruments for input and output. They wrote new
programming languages, compilers to interpret them, and debuggers to
troubleshoot. They invented word editors and format control languages. Here's
how Engelbart diagrams a *part* of his text-manipulation language in the same
report:

!["State--chart portrayal of part of text--manipulation control language"
[@engelbart_human_1969, 36].](images/engel-edit.png)

The diagram shows care and love for the craft of writing. But there is also
complexity. The feeling of transcendence the anonymous author describes in
using the system engages a sophisticated mechanism. But it was not the
mechanism that lifted the community up, it was the process of creating it.
Engaged in a methodical discipline of self-reflection the architects of
intellect augmentation followed traditional Delphic ideals of self actuation.
The very metaphor of bootstrapping suggests the impossibility of using one's
bootstraps to pull others out of the Platonic cave. Engelbart's liberatory
research program therefore left another less lofty imprint on the everyday
practice of modern intellectual life. Text, which before the advent of the
cathode ray was readily apparent on the page in all of its fullness, finally
entered a complex system of executable code and inscrutable control
instruction.  The material lightness of textual being came at the price of
legibility.

## Towards the Practice of Computational Poetics

In drawing this schematic history of contemporary textuality, it is my hope to
convince the reader of the very literal sense of depth manufactured into the
structure of commonplace modern-day literary devices that facilitate reading
and writing. Even print materials, which seem to escape computational
complexity, still follow the path of the fissure I have described above. With
a few exceptions, every transmitted sign today recapitulates the history of a
simulated semiotics. All printed media passes from keyboard to digital
storage, where it recedes from view.  Finally, it emerges on the screen, in a
simulation that recreates some of the physical affordances lost in the process
of remediation. The reader turns an non-page, for there are no more pages to
be turned.

In its advanced form, the simulation usurps the simulated. The avatar
continues to mimic its object even as the object passes from use. Actions like
"scrolling" text on the screen simulate an action that for most users has no
basis in experience (of handling scrolls). The page too may at some point
cease to identify a material unit of information for a generation of readers
who have never seen paper pages---recall the viral image of a child trying to
"swipe" a magazine cover. Still, it is likely that the word processor and the
electronic book reader will continue to simulate digital pages. No longer
connected to any familiar physical affordances like scrolling, turing a page
will pass into the realm of a dead metaphor.

The gap between input and output is what gives rise to the ephemeral quality
of digital text. Temporary storage media located on the way from keyboard to
page or screen allows for rapid and frequent remediation. It keeps the ink in
motion unattached to a "sticky" medium like paper. However, the spatial
elongation of the sign also comes at a cost. Submerged in the passage between
keyboard and screen or paper, the inscription passes from view. In its
ephemeral "liquid" form it is also no longer legible to the naked human eye.
It reappears again on the screen or page already "processed," that is, altered
by the intervention of the "control unit." Writing or reading on a device can
thus no longer remain a solitary activity. Machine operators far removed from
the site of interpretation intervene to mediate the encounter between reader,
writer, and text.

The consequences of that intervention are immense. With time, supplemental
"control characters" designed to format documents fuse with programming
languages, capable of generalized device control. Technological and legal
fictions rise to restore a measure of "stickiness" to text in its ephemeral
form. For example, manufacturers commonly embed digital rights management
circuits into video streaming devices to artificially limit the duplication of
broadcast material. Similarly, electronic book sellers often prevent readers
from copying and pasting words on the page. Such measures mimic some of the
constraints associated with static, paper-and-ink-bound media regimes.

I began the chapter to ask: Where does the computed sign reside? The
complexity of the answer belies our alienation. Not since the pre-modern times
have readers and writers been so removed from the material contexts of
literacy. The average reader today is privy only to the surface phenomena. To
rectify the situation is to acknowledge that all strategies of interpretation
from simple reading to literary analysis continue to rely on semiotic models
removed from the stark realities of the computed sign. The development of key
textual technologies that really do govern "intellect augmentation" *en masse*
happens in virtual isolation from the communities of practice. The condition
presents a grave danger to communities whose norms and practices rely on the
free flow of information between their members. Whatever the political goals,
humanists must work with software engineers and user interface designer to
engage in the grand project of augmenting the intelligence of humanity. We
must become our own bootstrapping community, capable of affecting the means of
our own intellectual production.

What seems like a given, necessary, and *a priori* configuration of writing
and reading implements---the keyboard, the hard drive, and the screen---is in
essence an ad-hoc, historically contingent, and ultimately permeable system of
information exchange. But to recover the sign in full we must enact a media
archeology at all layers and sites of the inscription.

I am tempted to believe in conclusion, like others have before me, that I am
on my way to enacting something like "machine phenomenology" or "systems
phenomenology"---a glimpse within, into an inner space of an assemblage which
encompasses people, texts, techniques, and technologies. In such cases, astute
readers often reach for Jakob von Uexküll's *A Foray into the Worlds of
Animals and Humans* in order to borrow from his notion of perceptual worlds
(umwelten).[^ln3-umwelten] In his forays, Uexküll imagines a multitude of
alien ways of seeing the world, from that of a sea urchin to those of a pea
weevil and the ichneumon wasp. For Uexküll, the task of the biologist is not
to encounter such living things as unfamiliar "machines" in the human world,
but, rather, to occupy the alien life form as another subject. The tick should
not be looked at as yet another machine, Uexküll writes, but as an "operator"
[@uexkull_foray_2010, 44-53]. Consequent to this point of view is Uexküll's
insistence on the subjectivity of perceptual experience. The tick carries with
it its own sense of time and space, which the biologist recovers through the
description of its perceptual apparatus (What can this organism perceive?) and
therefore by reconstructing its projected world view (What does a stimulus
mean for this organism?). In this way, the subject establishes what Uexküll
calls a "circuit of meaning." The canopy of an oak tree, for example, acts in
unison with material properties of rain to capture and distribute liquid down
to the roots of the tree. Capturing and distributing liquid to the roots
constitutes, in that sense, the "meaning" of the oak--rain circuit. It is a
peculiar notion of "meaning" to be sure, but for Uexküll it is enough to
maintain that meaning arises out of the subject's interaction with its
environment. The subject and object are brought into what Uexküll calls
harmony:

> If the flower were not bee-like
> If the bee were not flower-like
> The harmony would never succeed [@uexkull_foray_2010, 198].

Similarly, the pea and the pea weevil achieve harmony through "meaning
transfer" between the pea and the weevil larvae, which allows the larvae to
prepare an escape hatch through vegetative matter in advance of its pupation
[@uexkull_foray_2010, 161].

[^ln3-umwelten]: See for example @agamben_open_2003, 39-49; @hayles_print_2004,
16-17.

The literature of post-humanism privileges these moments of alien subjectivity
because they destabilize an anthropocentric view of the world. What gets lost
in the shifting of perspectives is the apparent contradiction at the very core
of what the writer Dorion Sagan (rightly) calls "Gaia sciences"
[@uexkull_foray_2010, 12], the idea ascendant in diverse fields from literary
studies to information theory and free-market economics, relegating meaning
creation from the level of the subject to the level of complex system.
Paradoxically, because Uexküll's model of communication makes meaning available
only at the system level ("oak plus rain" or "bee plus flower"), it is never
available to the subject itself (bees or flowers). The quest for alien
semiotics leads only to, in Uexküll's own words, "mute interaction"
[@uexkull_foray_2010, 148], meaningful only from some vantage point outside of
the system. The forest always "understands" more than the tree, the planet more
than the forest, and so on, in a regression that can only conclude with
whole-universe monism: the One.

In his essay on the subjective experience of bats, Thomas Nagel concludes that
there must be something about the experience of a bat *for* a bat
[@nagel_what_1974, 439] that is not fully accessible to human description. The
attempt to describe things in-themselves for-themselves, in that light, seems
like yet further human hubris. Accepting the meta-human "systems" view of
meaning formation would mean also to acknowledge the limits of the human to
comment on the proceedings---lest the organ speak for the organism. And to
encounter the bat (a dog, a tree, a machine) from the perspective of the human
is to respect and to retain a measure of the other's ineffable alienness. There
is a quiet humanism in Nagel's suggestion that we should confine our remarks to
objective phenomenology, not dependent on the self-deceiving acts of the
imagination [@nagel_what_1974, 449]. After all, one can never truly become a
bat or a tick.  We can only imagine what it is like to be a bat *for* a human.
"Certainly it appears unlikely," Nagel writes, "that we will get closer to the
real nature of human experience by leaving behind the particularity of our
human point of view and striving for a description in terms accessible to
beings that could not imagine what it was like to be us" [@nagel_what_1974,
444]. Nagel suggests: "Though presumably it would not capture
everything, its goal would be to describe, at least in part, the subjective
character of experiences in a form comprehensible to beings incapable of having
those experiences" [@nagel_what_1974, 449].

I do not know what a truly objective phenomenology would look like, but I would
like to think that it would lie, at least in part, in the underlying material
conditions of perceptual media. I am able to advance an equitable description
of the system from the only perspective available to me. These blueprints and
diagrams are all we have to understand the ways in which the system affects its
constituents. Paying attention to the details of the schematics is the only way
to "dig" ourselves into something like an alien phenomenology. As the
humanities move in search of the digital, I find that they need to regain a
sense of the human. No perspective is available otherwise from which to enact
analysis or critique. Once recovered, that Archimedean point of leverage can
serve as a starting point for the work of de-naturalizing comfortable (if
calcified) notions of the digital. It is in this de-familiarization (in a sense
used by Viktor Shklovsky and Svetlana Boym) of the human that I see Uexküll's
contribution to the study of media phenomenology. The human disappears from
view not by some inevitable property of technological progress, but through
automation of experience. In refracting ourselves through the gaze of the
technological other we see the human world anew.

I return, then, to the subject of time, found throughout in the background of
this chapter. The popular imagination of digital machines belies a deep sense
of anxiety about the rhythm of the system as a whole, in which humans play only
a small part (as bug operators, users, or receivers). Telegraphs and
subsequently computers force an atomization of experience into discrete bits,
along with the opposite movement toward continuity fluid and rapid enough as to
move beyond the boundaries of human perception. Attention to the material
conditions of removable storage media reveals a delicate negotiation of
synchronicity between human and machine time, in a complex chain of encoding
and re-mediation that connects differing and incongruent perceptual apparatus.
Under these conditions, it would be a mistake to conflate digital and discrete,
just as it would be a mistake to reduce the human to the continuous.[^ln3-cont]
Homeostasis is found at some arbitrary point, contingently connected to human
biology and to current technological capability. The question of "What
constitutes a moment?" when watching television or reading a book, can become
then, "What *should* constitute a moment?" For the tick lying in wait for its
next warm meal, a moment can last for decades (Uexküll reports up to 18
years). "Time, which frames all events," Uexküll writes, "seemed to us to be
the only objectively consistent factor […], but now we see that the subject
controls the time of its environment" [@uexkull_foray_2010, 52]. The
computational environment before us constitutes the grounds for all
higher-level textual activity, from record keeping to poetry and software
development. From the textual grounds of human--machine interaction it then
becomes possible to derive poetics, in the sense of a study and an art of
creating one's own time: taking control of prosody, rhythm, meter, and cadence.

[^ln2-gate]: Solid state memory technology, flash memory for example, store
information in capacitor "circuit states." This by contrast with
electromagnetic storage that works by modulating electrical charge over a
magnetic surface. Solid state capacitor storage was used in the earliest
computers [@kahng_semipermanent_1967, 1296], but was prohibitively expensive to
manufacture until well into the twenty-first century, when solid state drives
began to replace electromagnetic storage in consumer electronics. In an early
(1967) paper on "A Floating Gate and Its Application to Memory Devices," Kahng
and Sze explain: "A structure has been proposed and fabricated in which
semipermanent charge storage is possible. A floating gate is placed a small
distance from an electron source. When an appropriately high field is applied
through an outer gate, the floating gate charges up. The charges are stored
even after the removal of the charging field due to much lower back transport
probability [...] Such a device functions as a bistable memory with
nondestructive read-out features. The memory holding time observed was longer
than one hour" [@kahng_floating_1967, 1288]. See also @horton_experimental_1962
and @frohman-bentchkowsky_fully_1971 on "floating gate avalanche injection."

[^ln2-printermen]: According to the U.S. Department of Labor statistics, women
comprised 24 percent of Morse operators in 1915 (before the wide-spread advent
of automated telegraphy). By 1931 women comprised 64 percent of printer and
Morse manual operators [@u.s._bureau_of_labor_statistics_displacement_1932,
514].

[^ln2-bacon]: This volume is also commonly translated as "Of the Dignity and
Advancement of Learning," following the Spedding edition. The first two books
of *The Advancement* appeared first in 1605. Together with books 6-9 published
in Latin in 1623 they are sometimes referred to as "Of the Advancement and
Proficience of Learning or the Partitions of Sciences," following the Oxford
1640 edition. I will follow the 1640 English edition here. Volume 10, in the new
Oxford Collected Works, containing *The Advancement*, is not out at the time of
my writing this chapter (2015).

[^ln2-brain]: We will later entertain the (real) possibility of
non-representational communication, suggested by early experiments in direct
brain-to-brain or brain-to-machine interfaces.

[^ln2-denning]: These stages correspond roughly to the "three generations of
electronic computing" outlined in Peter Denning's "theory of operating systems"
[@denning_third_1971].

[^ln2-busa]: See for example @hockey_history_2004, "Father Busa has stories of
truckloads of punched cards being transported from one center to another in
Italy."

[^ln2-magnet]: See for example @stefanita_magnetism_2012, 1-69 and
@ohmori_memory_2015.

[^ln2-loom]: These dates, as is usually the case with periodization, are
somewhat arbitrary. I suggest 1725 as an inaugural date when the French textile
worker Basile Bouchon used "drill paper" to automate industrial drawlooms
[@koetsier_prehistory_2001, 593-595; @randell_history_2003]. The inaugural
honors could also go to the brothers Banū Mūsā, ninth-century automata
inventors from Baghdad; to Jacques De Vaucanson, who delighted the public with
his lifelike mechanisms in the mid eighteenth century
[@riskin_defecating_2003]; or to Joseph Charles Marie Jacquard, who improved
upon and popularized Bouchon's looms on an industrial scale around the same
time.

[^ln2-follow]: I reproduce the text verbatim and preserving the line breaks,
since formatting is an important part of the reported experience.

[^ln1-timefob]: The source for the cryptic phrase is likely
@weller_early_1918, 21 and 30: "We were then in the midst of an exciting
political campaign, and it was then for the first time that the well known
sentence was inaugurated,---'Now is the time for all good men to come to the
aid of the party;' also the opening sentence of the Declaration of
Independence [...] were repeated many times in order to test the speed of the
machine."

[^ln2-punch]: "Two means are available for preparing the functional tapes
required for the operation of the interpolators. First, when the tabular
values of *f(x)* have been previously published, they may be copied on the
keys of the functional tape preparation unit [...] and the tape produced by
the punches associated with this unit, under manual control. Second, as
suitable control tape may be coded directing the calculator to compute the
values of *f(x)* and record them by means of one of the four output punches,
mounted on the right wing of the machine" [@staff_description_1949, 34].


[^ln2-hayles]: See also @hayles_print_2004.
