# Chapter 5: Literature Down to a Pixel

Screens have this one major peculiarity: they refresh themselves multiple
times per second. Even those shapes that appear to stand still on them
continuously move at a speed beyond the threshold of human perception. We are
vaguely aware of this movement: it is commonly visible when a screen appears
on another screen, as it does in documentary films that show someone typing at
a computer terminal or watching television. The difference in flicker rates
between the projector showing the image and the projector "in the frame" is
what produces the characteristic horizontal interference pattern. Such
glitches give us a glimpse into the nature of simulation.

The sign is no longer immutable, as if etched in stone. Rather, we observe it
in motion. The "illusion" of digital textuality is a consequence of the
dynamic property of projection. To place texts on a screen is to bring them
closer to moving image. What does it mean to perceive seemingly static words
through a fundamentally dynamic medium? What happens to literature that takes
place on cinema screens?

In this chapter, a short meditation on the digital commonplaces in popular
culture precedes two case studies, one from the material history of telegraphy
and the other from the history of modern display technology. Archival
material---patents, blueprints, phenomenological accounts from the early
history of word processing---will be brought to bear on a debate concerning
the nature of digital representation and perception in the philosophy of
aesthetics.

Digital *X*: the adjective is everywhere now used yet so poorly felt and
understood. One intuits it has something to do with numbers or fingers, but
something more is always at stake in its distinction from analog things. That
something---a remainder, a trace---will be my focus here. A series of case
studies will test our theoretical intuitions against the material realities of
digital representation. I will advance, as always, a materialist, formal, and
historically-grounded analysis. This chapter will engage the elemental
particulates of two fundamental media conduits: electric ether and liquid
crystal. The first is a primary host for telegraphy. The second filters light
on screen.

I am also concerned here with a phenomenological description of human
perception. My goal is to disrupt the naturalized congruity between organ and
device. The quality of something being "digital," I argue, might initially
appear to be an intrinsic attribute of the medium. Under closer examination,
it reveals itself as a political construct that lays claims on the body,
structuring the physical affordances of communication. The change of the
*medium* from paper to pixel entails a series of corresponding changes in the
*mode* of perception. The mode "attunes" viewers to its message. By attunement
I mean something analogous to what Marcel Mauss has called the "techniques of
the body": the way in which we sit down to read for example, the position of
head and hands, eye movement, and posture [@mauss_techniques_2006, 78].
Attunement structures apprehension. It answers the "how" of perception.

It would be wrong to conflate the medium with the message in this context. At
stake in the digital--analog divide is rather a reader's ability to do
something with texts. Throughout this chapter, I will use the word "medium" to
narrowly identify the physical conduits of representation.[^ln3-oed] Thus the
medium of painting is paint and canvas; the medium of books is paper and ink.

A change in medium often implies a corresponding change in the mode of
perception. At some level of music production, for example, classical music
may involve a family of brass woodwind instruments, shaped to move and vibrate
air. Brass, wood, wind, and air are media through which sound and vibration
travel to reach a listener's ear. The mode of music appreciation is listening,
which involves a set of conventional cultural techniques: the buying of
tickets, dress code, and proper comportment at a concert. But these modalities
are not rigidly determined. Members of the deaf community, for example, may
use other modes of listening, like leaning against sound amplifying speakers
or touching an instrument while it is being played.

Yet at another stage of music production, classical music involves notation. A
whole system of distribution is built around the printing and circulation of
sheet music. Modalities of reading sheet music involves other body postures,
strategies of interpretation, cultural and financial institutions.

We confuse the conversation when we conflate the modality of information
(music, image, text) with the physical channel of its transmission (air,
liquid crystal, paper). Modality influences the message to a much greater
extent than medium. In fact, in most communication systems, the medium is a
relatively neutral conduit. One can use a violin to transmit a concerto or a
secret message. The medium remains the same, whereas the mode of apprehension
changes. To decode a secret violin message, listeners might attune themselves
to a different pitch. Modality shapes apprehension, whereas media---air, wood,
and strings---remain agnostic to the information being transmitted.

Initially, we must know how to perceive and which senses to use: when to look,
touch, or listen. Modalities further contain the "register" of a message.
Register identify the signifying elements: Which of these sounds, I need to
understand, is a part of the composition. And which are incidental? In refined
arts the register also governs bodily technique: one must neither speak nor
cough during a classical recital, for example. One can look at but not touch
artwork in a museum. The modality of communication ultimately demands corporal
compliance; it is a claim on the body.

Therein lies the starkest difference between analog and digital media. The
shift from one to the other affects not the message but mode of perception. It
is as if someone has asked you to read a book or to watch a film in a
stranger's armchair. It feels "off" in a way that is difficult to explain. The
mode of digital perception similarly contorts the body into new and unfamiliar
shapes, which often give discomfort. Something happens when digital media
subsume their analog counterparts. An electronic device employs other
sensualities, modes of signification, ways of listening and understanding.

## Digital Wake (My Two Terminators)

What does the digital look like? It looks blue for one---not just any kind of
blue, but a particularly cool shade of pure blue, which passes from dark to
white, to translucent with starburst-like overtones. An online image search
for the word "digital" produces many sharp, sterile visuals of that kind.
Abstract geometric patterns predominate in the first dozen or so search
results: often forming curved, three-dimensional tunnels or lines that
resemble circuit boards. There are things too of course, cheap and expensive
consumer things like scanners, memory cards, circuit boards, and backup
drives, but most of all there are cameras---digital cameras, which stand in
stark contrast to "traditional film photography." Few marketplace objects
exhibit such a strong sense of the opposition between the digital and analog
as a consumer camera.

These search pages also contain the outdated clich√©s of yesterday's digital
detritus: digital clocks, purple lightning bolts, and the abstract chrome
landscapes made widely available by graphic editing software in the 1990s.
There are numbers. The preferred arrangement is in a torrential grid---the
matrix---descending in the background, behind a generic humanoid form, also
translucent. Or better yet: alphanumeric characters comprising a globe or a
face. Ones and zeros are best arranged as an unending string, which runs at a
slight angle on the Z-axis and beyond the frame, foregrounding whatever object
that is meant to take on the digital as a property: the digital wake.

When we constrict the image-search to the twenty-first century, we see these
cool-blue images give way to a more varied palette: bright prime greens,
yellows, and reds in retro-geometric pixelated shapes. Pixels take place of
numbers here---not the small, invisible pixels of contemporary computer
screens, but the large and boxy pixels that by their pronounced boxiness
flaunt their digital being. These images allude to a time when pixels really
did stand out as individual units, when technology was not refined enough to
produce the illusion of visual continuity. This faux lo-fi aesthetic likely
appeals to the romantic nostalgia many feel for the early days of computing,
and yet it also asserts its independence from that history. No longer shall
the digital serve to emulate reality, nor be judged merely by its degree of
lifelike verisimilitude. The blocky world of Markus Persson's *Minecraft*
(2011) stands in antithesis to the magical realism of Cyan's *Myst* (1993),
the best-selling graphic-adventure PC game of the twentieth century. Where the
critics lauded the latter for its moody and atmospheric photo-realistic
environments, the former embraces the playful, low-bit, low-fidelity aesthetic
of gaming consoles from the 1980s. The pseudo-pixelated world of Minecraft
encourages its inhabitants to experiment with deconstruction, producing cuboid
landscapes that foreground discontinuity of form and surface.

Digital iconography works in another direction too, by approaching and
challenging the perceived continuity of the analog world. Liquid-metal
*Photoshop* font effects are thus supplanted by hyperrealistic renderings of
fire, smoke, and water: fluid elements that are difficult to render digitally,
especially in movement. Digital alchemy approaches the boundaries of
technological possibility, but absent the constraints of realism it pushes
past reality, past nature, and past mere fidelity to the natural world. A
real-world explosion caught on film looks cheap in comparison to its cinematic
"special-effects" simulacrum. A blazing corporate logo rendered digitally
would lose much of its appeal were it produced by literally lighting a
logograph on fire. The burning digital logograph does not just say "We are
hot!" or "We are on fire!" (that would be too naive)---it says that our fire
is better than fire, more vivid and more lifelike. The digital fire is the
ideal, Platonic image of fire: an image that all actual fires should emulate.

I am evoking these commonplaces to get at the conflicting popular intuitions
about "the digital" as something at once discrete, angular, and therefore
reductive and deterministic, but also shiny, smooth, perfect, and liquid in
the way that drowns out or transcends everything susceptible to time,
everything that has a distinct shape and anatomy. Consider the transition
between between *The Terminator* and *Terminator 2*. In the former, the "bad"
robot that sets out to destroy humanity is an animatronic mechanism. In the
latter, it is an amorphous puddle of mercury that makes the original
mechanical Arnold seem like a friend and savior [@cameron_terminator_2001;
@cameron_terminator_2003]. The first terminates with shotguns and tire irons;
the second morphs into human shapes and pours itself inside, threatening life
from within.

Like the terminators of yesteryear, digital sprites and bogeymen have lost
their hold over popular imagination. Digital photography, digital clocks, and
digital humanities already ring archaic in their futuristic ambition, going
the way of e- or i- anything: the way of retro-suffixes like -bot, -mat, -lux,
and -tron. The digital dissolves into the everyday as all clocks, all books,
all texts, in short, all human activity passes through some form of "digital
being." My aim here and throughout has been to understand what is meant by its
evocation: to "come to terms," to make visible, to denature, and to make it
appear strange again.

"Digital media," "digital humanities," "digital divides": these constructions
share a word which suggests entirely differing qualities depending on the
context. In some cases, digitality stands in opposition to a notion of
naturally "analog" human experience. Thus, digital media reduce "fuzzy" and
indeterminate human experience to something binary, discrete, and
deterministic. In his influential monograph *The Cultural Logic of
Computation*, for example, David Golumbia insists that "languages are not
codes." Human language practice for him therefore should not be reduced to a
"single correct interpretation" or "at the absolute limit, a determinate
number of discrete interpretations" [@golumbia_cultural_2009, 19]. "To submit
a phenomenon to computation," Golumbia writes, "is to striate otherwise-smooth
details, analog details" [@golumbia_cultural_2009, 11]. Following Deleuze, he
conceives of "striated space" in opposition to spaces "smooth" and "analog"
like brains, society, politics, language, and baseball
[@golumbia_cultural_2009, 22, 130-5]. For Golumbia, striated and digital
phenomena fall under suspicion because "our society is already oriented
towards binarisms, hierarchy, and instrumental rationality"
[@golumbia_cultural_2009, 222]. Human experience, in this view, is continuous
and analog. The digital threatens it by breaking it apart into individual, and
it is implied, computable units.

In his essay against digital humanities, Stephen Marche worries about the
digitization of human experience for the opposite reason. Smoothness, in his
view, is a property of the machine. "Meaning is mushy," he writes:

> Meaning falls apart. Meaning is often ugly, stewed out of weakness and
> failure. It is as human as the body, full of crevices and prey to diseases.
> It requires courage and a certain comfort with impurity to live with.
> Retreat from the smoothness of technology is not an available option, even
> if it were desirable. The disbanding of the papers has already occurred, a
> splendid fluttering of the world's texts to the winds. We will have to
> gather them all together somehow. But the possibility of a complete,
> instantly accessible, professionally verified and explicated, free global
> library is more than just a dream. Through the perfection of our smooth
> machines, we will soon be able to read anything, anywhere, at any time.
>
>Insight remains handmade [@marche_literature_2012].

In this vision, digital artifacts now fall under suspicion for smoothing out
difference and thereby for betraying some essential, wonderfully messy and d
property of being human.

Stanley Fish, another prominent critic of the digital humanities, writes in a
similar vein. The traditional humanities for Fish exist within the "linear,
temporal medium in the context of which knowledge is discrete, partial and
situated---knowledge at this time and this place experienced by this limited
being." By contrast, the digital humanities imagine a "steady yet dynamic
state where there is movement and change, but no center, no beginning and end,
just all middle." The digital vision is meant to deliver us from linearity and
from time itself [@fish_digital_2012]. Indeed, Fish argues, the digital fails
because it does not offer *enough* of a difference:

> Delivered from linearity, from time-bound, sharply delineated meanings, from
> mortality, from death, everyone, no longer a one, will revel in and
> participate in the universal dance, a "mystical dance" of "mazes intricate,
> / Eccentric, intervolved, yet regular / Then most when most irregular they
> seem, / And in their motions harmony divine / So smooths her charming tones,
> that God's own ear / Listens delighted. (John Milton, "Paradise Lost," V,
> 620, 622-627) [@fish_digital_2012]

Whether too discrete or too continuous, critics agree on the danger of
digitization. Digital being follows determinism and mechanization as an
opponent to humanism. Whether it is Plato discussing the role of writing in
*Phaedrus*, or Fish discussing the development of digital humanities through
Milton, critics worry that emergent modes of representation will fail to weave
the human experience into their fabric. New media is often depicted as
departing from some previously constructed category of the human, with one
audience applauding its trans-human potential for liberation and the other
lamenting its anti-human potential for demise and destruction. A conversation
about media modalities, unlike any other, is quick to slide into ethics,
aesthetics, politics.[^ln3-digital]

Because apprehension is grounded in the physical capabilities of human
perception, new media affect the very notion of what it means to be human. I
am interested first and foremost in the challenge digital media pose to
humanity as a determined, a priori category.[^ln5-apriori] The repeated
contradiction in debates around digital media exposes a historically
contingent anxiety. Both orthodoxies of humanism and the futuristic ambition
of post-humanism are displaced onto the same digital--analog distinction. The
material conditions of media production do not, however, allow for social
constructivism unmoored from the senses. Technology evolves along the lines of
human perception. The illusion of continuity disappears, for example, when
screen projection flickers much slower than 60 frames per second. A historical
account of digital media must therefore acknowledge both its contingent and
essential characteristics.[^ln3-cont]

In what follows I offer two case studies that challenge commonly expressed
intuitions about digital media. They show that whatever is meant by the
digital-analog distinction is tied not to some essential properties of a
medium, but to its affordances. A text that can be copied and preserved is
more digital, in a sense, than one that is limited in its circulation: whether
by nature or design. A philosophical consideration of the terms---digital and
analog---will inform the media archaeology that follows.

## Spiritual Telegraph

The contemporary attempt to "fix" human experience on the spectrum between
discrete and continuous representation echoes a similar conversation that
occurred at the turn of the previous century. The parallels suggest that our
present belief in the essentialism of corporeal technique---writing by hand,
for example---in fact constitutes an arbitrary idea of the human.

Consider the spiritual conversations surrounding telegraphy. At the time
before the standardization of the telegraph alphabets, multiple ways of
translating language into electrical signal competed for their share of the
rapidly growing telecommunications market. Soon, a well-publicised feud
emerged between proponents of direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC)
based systems. A few technical details are necessary to understand how an
argument about engineering designs gained a metaphysical significance.

Telegraph systems based on direct current design converted electrical current
flow into dashes, and the absence of current into dots.[^ln3-ndc] Systems
based on alternating current designs converted Morse code (and other encoding
systems) into pulses of alternating positive and negative current, where
positive current could stand for "dashes" and negative for "dots." Direct
current designs preferred the use of the "saw tooth" or "square" periodic
waveforms to represent binary states. The signal was either "on" or "off" with
nothing in between. By contrast, literature on alternating current designs
often argued for the use of the more round, sinusoidal signal, which covered a
more "organic" range of amplitudes. The sinusoidal wave could be modulated
into a multitude of states [@crehore_practical_1900; @hausmann_telegraph_1915,
374]. Instead of being just "on" or "off" it offered measurable points of
current intensity along the curve of the sine wave. Consequently, alternating
current designs tended towards the transmission of continuous quantities like
images and cursive handwriting. The sinusoidal curve itself resembled natural,
organic shapes, like handwriting. The alternating current suggested a visual
analogy between the thing being transmitted (picture or text) and electric
signal.

The Pollak-Virag telegraph, which the media theorist Bernhard Siegert mentions
briefly in his essay on cacography, was one such device
[@siegert_cacography_2011]. A closer look reveals the reductive nature
implicit in the digital analog distinction. The Virag purported to transmit
handwriting, which was, despite the appearances, broken down into its discrete
constituent components in transit. The original Pollak-Virag machine patented
in 1900 sent regular Morse encoding by means of alternating current of two
different polarities and two different strengths, for a total of four types of
signals.[^ln3-siegert] Other than the irregular signal shape and the use of
alternating current, the Pollak-Virag encoding differed little from
single-Morse systems. By 1901, however, the authors were issued an American
patent for the "Writing Telegraph," which built on their previous design in an
interesting way. Rather than using a wave in four steps, the authors proposed
an "automatic transmitter [...] capable of sending current impulses over the
line which correspond to the direction and the size of a single letter
element" [@pollak_writing-telegraph_1901, 3]. In other words, they wanted to
bend the sinusoidal wave to correspond roughly to the shape of the letter. In
this way, the letter "s," to pick an easy example, could be transmitted by the
means of an s-shaped wave (Fig. 5-1).

!["[R]eproduction of Gothic characters'" and "transmission-strip having
suitable perforations for influencing the receiver to reproduce
[them]."[@pollak_writing-telegraph_1901].](images/figure-5-1.jpg)

The Pollak-Virag design thus aimed to constitute an electrical alphabet
analogous to cursive writing: "to trace in a substantially continuous unbroken
outline the written letters composing the matter transmitted"
[@pollak_writing-telegraph_1901, 1]. To achieve this, the engineers broke
cursive script down into distinct vertical and horizontal elements. The
Pollak-Virag encoding thus represented a continuous quality---cursive
script---through discrete atomic elements, as punches that moved the writing
stylus in cardinal directions---up, down, left, or right. It was not a purely
analog device. The analogy was rather achieved through a process of discrete
analytic atomization of script on ticker tape and its subsequent
reconstitution into a continuous shape. The cardinal directions comprise an
intermediate, discrete description of smooth handwriting curves. Pollak and
Virag believed that their sine wave telegraph had the distinct advantage of
transmitting messages "recorded in ordinary written or script characters." In
the language of the patent, other forms of "facsimile" telegraph transmitted
merely the "conventional form" of the letter, and not the letter itself,
whereas the Pollak-Virag system was "non-autographic"
[@pollak_writing-telegraph_1901, 1]. The autographic telegraph claimed to
preserved the particularity of the human hand, an individual's signature. It
was the "humane" telegraph in the sense that it preserved the human trace.

The metaphysics accompanying telegraph communication at the time were often
concerned with the possibility of human erasure in communication.  Notions of
material discreteness and continuity represented not mere physical attributes
of encoding or electricity but higher-order cultural and even ethical or
theological categories. Beneath the technical conversations about the
advantages of discrete or continuous electrical signal lay a philosophic
concern with the fundamental makeup of the universe itself.

Henri Bergson, for example, wrote about the "real whole of the universe,"
which constituted an "indivisible continuity" [@bergson_creative_1944, 36].
Science, technology, and other "artificial systems" in his thought imposed
discrete "partial views" on the whole.[^ln3-bergsonism] These partial views
resembled the operation of the cinematograph, he wrote, which divides
continuous motion into distinct frames. By running the frames through a
projecting apparatus, telegraphs reconstituted "the individuality of each
particular movement." "Such is the contrivance of the cinematograph," Bergson
wrote, "[a]nd such is also that of our knowledge."[@bergson_creative_1944,
332] The intellect, in this view, continually partitioned undifferentiated
reality into discrete states of time and space [@bergson_creative_1944,
167-182; @russell_philosophy_1914, 4]. But these states were virtually, not
actually, discrete. The evolution of life proceeded, according to Bergson,
"rather like a shell" which "bursts into fragments," which are themselves
again shells [@bergson_creative_1944, 109]. The new differentiated unit, a
part of the indivisible universe, contained the kernel of the whole. It did
not split from but subsume the totality.

In Bergson's view of the universe, the brain and the central nervous system
acted as a "central telephonic exchange," which communicates between the
extrinsic continuous world and the intrinsic "memory-shot[s]" of our
perception [@bergson_matter_1912, 19, 280]. The mind receives "images" of the
world that it compares with existing "stored" images to produce a new
composite image that is once again stored into memory. Bergson thus denied the
"flashlight" model of perception. The mind, according to him, does not shine a
light to bring attention to this or that hidden feature of the world:

> Metaphor for metaphor, we would rather compare the elementary work of
> attention to that of the telegraph clerk who, on receipt of an important
> dispatch, sends it back again, word for word, in order to check its accuracy
> [@bergson_matter_1912, 123].

The object in the world is thus neither an independent thing nor purely a
product of the mind. By this "telegraphic" model of perception, Bergson avoids
both fully relativistic and fully essentialist accounts of perception.

To agree with Bergson is to imagine the mind as a cinematographic "framing"
device. It is to accept that the world is a priori continuous in nature. In a
damning evaluation of Bergson's philosophy, Bertrand Russel noted that such
assumptions were merely poetic images, not subject to verification
[@russell_philosophy_1914, 24]. They hold the truth of poetry, Russel wrote,
not physics or philosophy. To this day, it is difficult to find scientific
consensus on such topics as the "digital make up of the physical world" or on
the continuity of conciousness. There was certainly no consensus on the matter
at the time. The nature of telegraphy itself was disputed. The property of
being electric, similar to digitality today, was seen both as smoothing more
smooth and more discrete than human experience.

Consider the following passages from the Swedenborg-inspired *Spiritual
Telegraph* in 1854, in which an anonymous author expounds a theological media
theory that hinges on what he or she assumes to be the ultimately discrete
nature of the universe.[^ln3-swedenborg] Anonymous writes:

> Whenever two persons are brought into sympathetic relations, either by
> corporeal contact or through those refined media which pervade the Universe
> and serve as the airy vehicles of thought, they mutually feel the presence
> of each other [@brittan_spiritual_1854, 169].

In this relationship "the mind which is gifted with the greater degree of
activity and power" at once attains a hierarchical relation to the lesser
intellect, becoming "the proximate cause and fountain of inspiration to the
other" [@brittan_spiritual_1854, 169]. God naturally occupies the highest
point of such a pyramid:

> from sources superior to ourselves, the very elements of life and thought
> flow into us, and every living thing, according to its nature and discrete
> degree, derives a kind of inspiration from that which is above
> [@brittan_spiritual_1854, 169].

The discrete degree must be preserved, in other words, because without it the
hierarchy would lose meaning. Thus, to facilitate the "transmission of
impressions," "the recipient" of the vital flow "must be willing to receive
instruction, and assume the passive or negative relation of a learner." Without
discreteness and without hierarchy he will resist "the infusion of foreign
impressions and Divine ideas" [@brittan_spiritual_1854, 169].

In this essentially telegraphic model of the universe, to deny the step-wise
hierarchy of "refined media" is to close oneself off to the "transmission of
impressions," in a communication act---consisting of a "contact" and the
exchange of signifying "thought vehicles"---between "source superior" and the
"receiver of instructions," who are placed in a binary and opposing relation
--"negative" but without "resistance"---to the idea of the divine.

Unlike Golumbia and Fish today, telegraph spiritualists associated determinism
with continuity not discreteness. Witness one George Henry Dole writing in his
*Philosophy of Creation*, in 1906:

> Scientists have prosecuted research on the plane of *continuous degrees of
> the ultimates*, and they have thereby failed to penetrate to *interior
> things of discrete degree* [emphasis mine]. Consequently they derive life as
> not from the Lord, but from nature, of which they have no other idea than
> that it is something mechanical [@dole_philosophy_1906, 236-7].

Telegraph spiritualists shunned continuity because it confused sacred and
profane. They believed that a truly Christian order would remain digital in
essence. To claim otherwise would be to propagate the Gnostic heresy, by which
the divine was one with the profane [@edwards_neglected_1990;
@shaked_dualism_2005, 52-71].

Where Bergson believed telegraphy to translate continuous "analog" experience
into discrete "digital" snapshots, the Swedenborgian mystic saw it as a model
of communication that maintained fidelity to the hidden order of a
well-differentiated and discrete universe. Their intuitions were, in other
words, diametrically opposed. When arguing against sine-wave telegraphy in
1905, Donald Murray, whose alphabet would become the basis for modern
character encodings like ASCII and UTF-8, displayed a similar bias against
analog quantities, which, for him, could encode complex human activity like
writing or dance. "About ten years ago there was a brisk discussion in some of
the electrical journals in regard to the advantages of the simple harmonic
curve or sine wave for the transmission of power by by the alternating
current," he wrote.

> [I]f Smith wants to make Jones spin round like a dancing dervish, the best way
> might be for Smith to transmit sine waves [...] but in practice, Smith always
> wants to make Jones perform an excessively complicated and irregular series
> of motions, and for this purpose it is essential to transmit similar motions
> by introducing upper harmonics in a fragmentary, non-periodic, and very
> irregular way [@murray_setting_1905, 559].

Murray, again contrary to Bergson, assumed that human experience was discrete
at its core. For him, the regular and continuous sine wave fell under
metaphysical suspicion, just as the discrete nature of computation would fall
under suspicion for contemporary critics like Golumbia and Fish. Human
experience, in Murray's view, is analogous to the saw-tooth wave: fragmentary,
non-periodic, and irregular. The sine wave, by contrast, had the "exotic"
characteristics of being cyclical, repetitive, and continuous. The shape of
the square wave more closely resembled Murray's own normative vision of human
culture.[^ln3-dervish]

The appeal to normative discourse in this context belies a kind of a
technological essentialism, reductive of both technology and human nature.
Neither can be definitively reduced to universal notions of "discrete" or
"continuous." Under close examination, human perception---cognition,
conciousness, existence---involves a complex synthesis of analog and digital
processes. Telegraphs and computers too function in the digital mode at some
layers of the system, and at others in the analog. The very distinction
between digital and analog, as I will continue to challenge it in this
chapter, comes under increasing doubt.

It is tempting to think of the telegraph as a digital [*sic*] apparatus,
created to convert analog [*sic*] input into electric signal.[^ln3-tele] The
innards of the Pollak-Virag telegraph, to return to our example, reveal
complex dynamics that involve long chains of trans-coding and trans-mediation,
that oscillate between discrete and continuous qualities. In order to be
transmitted, signals must travel through biological "wetware," ink and paper,
the mechanical action of cogs and wheels, and finally, through copper wire by
means of an electric signal. In the process, language, already a discrete and
portable representation of thought, undergoes a number of further
material-phase transformations. In the writing telegraph, this involves what I
have been calling, borrowing from the language of concrete poetry, inter- or
trans-mediation: from notebook to paper tape to the movement of an
electromagnetic vibrator to the recording mirror galvanometer into the copper
wire to the receiving vibrator and into the machinations of the printing
apparatus that once again produces ink and alphabet.[^ln5-intermedia] This
entire system further participates in the complexities of the human
neurological apparatus, involving haptic, visual, and cognitive feedback.
Neither wholly digital nor analog, the signal undergoes multiple encoding and
phase changes in transmission.

[^ln5-intermedia]: On intermedia in concrete poetry see @wendt_sound_1985;
@higgins_intermedia_2001.

By "encoding," if we could pause again to define the terms, I mean a
"controlled mode of representation." Representation in its unrestrained form
(as in "pictorial representation") differs from "encoding" in the size of its
vocabulary. Painting and other forms of uninhibited representational
conventions offer limitless expressive possibilities. The "language" of
painting, we might say, is infinite. Encoding, by contrast, reduces the
universe of expressive possibilities to a limited number of salient "codes,"
like the alphabet. These codes have a formal grammar and rules of composition.
Although the expressive potential of written language is limitless in some
combinatorial sense of the word, language and other codes can "break," that
is, be reduced to nonsense, in a way that painting strictly cannot. An
artificial computer language constrains the vocabulary even further. Contrast
finally the infinitude of possible brush strokes with the hundred or so
reserved words available to a C++ programmer.

Media, modes, and encodings are logically related, in non-obvious ways.
Changes in the media conduit---from sound, wire, or paper for
example---necessitate the corresponding modal change. Consider a Morse code
transmission coaxed out of a violin, written on paper, or transmitted by wire.
In each case, the encoding remains formally the same: dots and dashes. But the
dots and dashes are expressed alternatively in ink, as sound waves, and
electrical charge. The encoding changes however, when human speech is
transferred into Morse code. In reading and playing music, a musician
furthermore transforms musical notation---a controlled, paper-bound
vocabulary---into sound waves, unlimited in their expressive potential.

Blueprints for the writing telegraph reveal a device that mixes discrete and
continuous modes of representation, through multiple acts of transcoding and
transmediation. Digitality defined by those terms is not a helpful reduction.
The telegraph, more precisely, is a device that pushes language---normally
bound to brains (as thought), air (as speech), paper (as a writing system)---
through metal wire.[^ln5-underwater] To "fit" into the wire, a thought changes
its conduit media. It undergoes a number of modal transformations in the
process: from the hexagonal grid patterns at regions of cortical anatomy, to
ripple-like sound waves, to rectangular sentences and paragraphs arranged
spatially on paper, to the chain of charged electrons, arranged serially along
the length of the wire. An arrangement of cells, changes into an arrangement
of air molecules, ink, and copper each entailing their own systems of encoding
and mechanisms of storage, retrieval, and transmission. The affordances of
media change. A sound wave dissipates momentarily. Ink dries and endures. The
electric signal travels at the speed of light.

If we could imagine, for a moment, the human itself as a persistent data
structure---an arrangement of elements of a given time signature and
shape---we could say it outlasts the sounds wave, but not paper; that it moves
at a pace slower than light; that it exbibits more spatial continuity than
Morse code; that is less ordered and heterogeneous on a microscopic scale than
copper or liquid crystal. The modalities of human media intersect with
technology along multiple dimensions, in parts congruent, in parts divergent
from the complex system.

## Soap Opera Effect

Consider another case study at the human-machine, digital-analog divide.
Modern televisions began shipping with a feature called "Motion-Compensated
Frame Interpolation" (MCFI) in 2010. It caused some viewers to report what was
dubbed the "soap opera effect." Everything looks cheap to a viewer
experiencing the soap opera effect. Even critically acclaimed footage,
featuring top acting talent and expensive camera work, looks unnatural, as if
produced on home video. I rapidly recognize its symptoms. Under the MCFI
effect, a shot's dynamics look somehow fabricated. The actors, even in films
that I have known and love, appear to be faking it. Their acting seems forced
and "over the top." I notice their makeup and props. It is like watching bad
silent cinema of the kind that prevents the suspension of disbelief and
immersion. I am no longer susceptible to the conventions of the genre.

MCFI was developed to correct motion blur that occurs on flat-panel liquid
crystal displays (LCDs). LCDs work by passing light through a liquid crystal
medium, sandwiched between two polarized light filters and positioned at 90
degrees to each other. As light enters through one side, it twists following
the slightly curved molecular structure of the crystal, allowing the beam to
rotate and pass through both filters. The structure unwinds when it receives
an electrical current, which effectively blocks light from passing through the
medium (Fig. 5-2). The gates close, so to speak, as the second filter prevents
light from exiting. By this refractive structure, a series of small,
pinhole-like pixels can be turned on and off to create shapes, letters, and
images on the screen.[^ln3-mishima]

!["A method for controlling the passage of radiation through a material
medium" [@land_light_1934. See also @reinitzer_beitrage_1888 and
@lehmann_flussige_1906].](images/figure-5-2.jpg)

In addition to filtering light, modern displays also flicker at a precisely
calibrated rate. What we observe as a static image on screen, is in reality a
highly dynamic projection. Traditional film projectors advance through 24
frames every second. The film camera's shutter similarly moves up and down 24
times per second, capturing a static snapshot at each turn. The projector and
the camera are thus in sync.

Furthermore, a projector's light flickers two to three times per frame, giving
it a "refresh rate" of 48‚Äì72 cycles per second, or Hertz (Hz), which produces
the effect of continuous motion. Without this strobe effect, under continuous
light, the succession of frames would appear a blurry streak of
undifferentiated images.

An image persists in the human visual field for about 16 milliseconds after
the stimulus passes, giving humans the temporal resolution of around 60 images
per second. Consequently, an average person reaches the state of "critical
flicker fusion"---in which the strobe light becomes unnoticeable---at refresh
rates equal or higher than 60Hz. At the limits of flicker fusion, the image
begins to persist through the gaps between frames, creating the appearance of
continuous motion [@efron_conservation_1973; @coltheart_iconic_1980;
@brannan_applications_1992]. Below the threshold of flicker fusion the viewer
would will notice the strobe effect, which hinders viewing.

LCDs mimic the action of an analog projector by refreshing the screen at
intervals between 60 and 120Hz. This happens even when the image is wholly
static, like the page of an electronic book.

To complicate matters, humans are more sensitive to rapid motion at the
periphery of vision, in a mechanism likely evolved to detect predatory attack
[@burr_temporal_1981; @didyk_perceptually-motivated_2010]. As we move closer
to our screens---when sitting in front of a computer monitor, for
example---more of the image enters our field of peripheral vision, making us
more sensitive to screen flicker. When sitting close to a screen, flicker can
become more noticeable because more of the moving image enters the sensitive
area of peripheral vision adept at perceiving rapid movement.

Furthermore, being closer to a screen increases the angular velocity of any
depicted moving object. When viewed from afar, the movement of several inches
on screen corresponds to a change in a sight angle, and likely a few
millimeters of iris movement. When viewed up close, the same several inches on
screen correspond to a much larger angle, forcing the iris to move further
laterally.

The human visual system is particularly adapt at tracking smooth, horizontal
movement, cognitively anticipating the perceived trajectory of a laterally
moving object, while stabilizing the retinal image and keeping it at the
center of the fovea in what is called "smooth pursuit" lateral eye movement
[@rottach_comparison_1996; @purves_types_2001;
@didyk_perceptually-motivated_2010]. To put it simply, we are good at tracking
things that move horizontally, like an antelope running across the plains.
Even though our brain cannot capture such movement smoothly, it fills such
gaps to create the illusion of smooth movement sideways. This makes us good at
anticipating the trajectory of laterally moving objects, another likely
adaptation that favors self-defense and hunting. But beyond some threshold,
and particularly when things move rapidly up and down, the motion begins to
appear fitful. Think of tracking a fly, for example, which seems to skip from
one place to another as our visual system struggles to process its complex
trajectories and threshold-crossing speeds.

The "sample and hold" nature of LCDs frustrates the cognitive assumption of
smooth movement. The brain assumes that moving objects move smoothly. But on
screen, the object's anticipated location does not always correspond to its
actual trajectory, since the motion of a represented object-image in the frame
does not follow the anticipated physics of a similarly sized real-world
object. The image moves inches where our brain tells us it moves yards.
Trajectories of moving objects on screen are further subject to the vagrancies
of video editing and recording. Because of the flicker, the movement is
actually intermittent; it is missing frames. The moving object appears at
discrete stationary locations punctuated by gaps in on-screen movement. This
mismatch between what is expected and what is perceived appears to the eye as
blur. Shapes become fuzzy in motion under certain unfavorable viewing
conditions [@klompenhouwer_motion_2004; @har-noy_lcd_2008]. To complicate
matters more, the on-off phase transitions of the liquid crystal medium are
not instantaneous. The individual pixel "fades" instead of vanishing at once,
leaving a physical (and not merely a perceptual) trail of not-quite
transitioned pixels in the wake of object movement [@kurita_moving_2001;
@pan_lcd_2005]. Digital television runs into the analog limitations of the
liquid crystal medium.

To put all of these factors together: we observe film shot at 24 frames per
second on LCD screens that redraw the screen at 60-120 times per second. The
disparity between the low sampling rate of traditional film and high sampling
rate of modern monitors confounds human perception, which evolved to process
motion in a particular way. The liquid crystal is also not a perfectly digital
medium. It exhibits analog trailing effects. To make matters worse we
increasingly watch television on small hand-held devices, close to our field
of vision. The combination of these factors made early LCD displays unsuitable
for home entertainment.

To compensate for motion blur, LCD manufacturers introduced a technology
called Motion-Compensated Frame Interpolation (MCFI), by which the television
itself inserts artificially computed frames in between the images on original
stock footage. The algorithm averages the moving object between two frames,
creates an approximation of its position, and injects the computed frame into
the action. The extra frames should, in theory, make the motion appear more
natural, filling in the missing gaps that confuse the brain. Unfortunately for
the viewer, the effectively higher sample rates carry a major unintended side
effect. Most viewers associate sampling rates of 40Hz and above with daytime
soap operas, which were, for a time, shot on lower quality (but more modern)
video equipment as opposed to expensive legacy film equipment used by the
big-budget film industry.

Film is expensive because film cameras work by fixing the image onto the
medium through a photochemical process. Like traditional film photography, raw
footage must be developed and processed properly before it can be used for
editing, playback, and distribution. Video and more modern, digital recorders,
by contrast, transform light into fluctuations of the electromagnetic field,
storing the results on tape or solid state storage (recall the floating gate).
The transducer (tape head) reads and writes directly from and to tape, making
magnetic storage significantly more compact and less expensive than film, as
it does not require chemical processing for playback
[@edgerton_columbia_2009].

Crucially for our story, video recorders operate at 60 frames per second, a
recording resolution that together with the distinctive video color profile
and audio aberration signatures give rise to what viewers perceive as that
"cheap video" "soap opera" look. By inserting extra frames into the moving
image, modern televisions in effect alter the apparently expensive, discrete,
slow film format to match its faster, more continuous, and cheaper video
alternative. The net improvement in sampling degrades the perceived quality of
the original. The motion may be smoother, but it looks unnatural, in that it
subtly differs from acculturated practice. It gives the eye too much detail.
Minutiae of costume and makeup, previously hidden by the low sampling quality
of film, become more readily apparent. An actor's micro-movements and
expressions, not usually perceptible to the eye, come to fore and highlight
the contrivance of the proceedings. The extrapolated detail breaks the spell
of acting.[^ln3-wall]

The soap opera effect again undercuts some of our most ingrained intuitions
about the analog--digital divide.

First, it challenges the easy equivalence between "digital" and "discrete"
properties of the medium so often found in critical literature. According to
accepted intuitions, film (the more discrete format of representation) more
closely approaches the analog (continuous) nature of observed phenomenon,
despite being the more fragmentary medium. Under closer examination, however,
it reveals itself to be more the more digital medium than digital video, if we
take "digital" to mean "discrete" and "differentiated." The incongruity
between theory and practice points to a confusion in terms. Since screens play
a key part in the reception of all "digital" media, film and text, we must
carefully peel apart the layers of the visible image to reveal its physics:
both in projection and perception.

Second, it seems that the material properties involved in our understanding of
"digital" and "analog" formats are also implicated in higher-level functions
of aesthetic judgment. Perception of quality in a given recorded performance
drifts with the vagrancies of encoding. "Good acting" inexplicably falls apart
with the introduction of extra frames. This should worry the critic unfamiliar
with artifacts of digital conversion. Even an introductory examination of the
soap opera effect, reveals sensory glitches and distortions which affect the
coupling between organ and device. The illusion of cinematic motion takes
advantage of the idiosyncratic particularities of human vision. A more
perfected visual apparatus would perceive flicker at much higher rates and
have no persistence visual trail artifacts. The socially constructed aesthetic
object is shown to contain physiologically-determined qualities, undermining
the strong version of social constructivism.[^ln4-construction]

Finally, where the literature often places "artificial" digital discreteness
in opposition to "natural" analog continuity, a thick description of our
perceptual apparatus along with projection physics reveals a complex patchwork
of fragmentary cognitive mechanisms, already digital and discrete in their
operation. The human-screen coupling is deeply heterogeneous throughout. At
some level of analysis, gaps in the encoding format relate to gaps in human
visual processing. Neither can be said to represent reality with perfect
fidelity. Instead, brains, cameras, and screens stitch landscapes together
from unevenly sampled visual topographies, achieving a measure of arbitrary
synchronicity in viewing.

Critical literature often conflates the discrete nature of digital
representation with human debasement, following the logic by which the
perceived material impoverishment in one sphere leads to the implied spiritual
impoverishment in the other. The sentiment is everywhere in the popular press,
having deep intellectual roots in the history of thinking about technology.
Philosophers of technology from Heidegger to Kittler advance a powerful
"hermeneutics of suspicion" towards mechanization, digitization, and the
subsequent computability of human experience. To take that tradition seriously
is to direct hermeneutic suspicion to aspects of digital being that have
meaningful socio-political consequences. If, as the case of motion blur
suggests, human experience is already and always "born digital," that is,
discrete and differentiated throughout, we must find ways of advancing
critique along theoretical distinctions that better capture the instrumental
reality of media practice. Nostalgia for "analog" oneness and continuity
should itself fall under the critical gaze, examined alongside media marketing
slogans advertising gapless playback and lossless file formats. To long for
the analog is to long for the experience of oneness, which was never attainable
the first place.

Indeed, it appears that the whole matter of digital representation rests on
arbitrary and contingent assumptions. If language and literature are already
digital and discrete systems of representation, why should it bother us when
it is otherwise digitized or transcoded into other controlled vocabularies?
The Latin letter already comprises an atomic and indivisible unit. When it is
further broken down into pixels, the smallest indivisible units on screen, it
undergoes only a subtle ontological change. Just as one learns to translate an
alphabet's arbitrary shape into distinct sounds, one can learn to translate
arbitrary digits into letters and back into sounds and thoughts. The language
of machines, in this sense, is merely another language. Neither do media
evolve independently of human sensory constraint. Humans cannot perceive the
ultraviolet spectrum, for example. Nor would it be practical to create books
so heavy as to prevent readers from turning their pages. Sensory constraints
shape media architecture and the other way around. Media modalities are
"tuned" to average human capabilities, which mature in their socially
constructed media modal environments.[^ln4-opera]

## We Have Always Been Digital

A thick description of the human-machine interface, at the point of contact,
exposes our frequent misunderstanding of the term "digital."  What does it
mean, for example, to "digitize" film, if it is already a digital medium?
What properties are being brought forth through digitization, if the digital
cannot simply be equated with discreteness? We can now revisit our initial
intuitions to attempt a formal definition, informed by the above case studies
and grounded in aesthetic theory.

The difference between discrete and continuous quantities defines the
conversation about digital media.[^ln3-maley] For example, in a popular book
about what a "well-informed person should know about computers," Brian
Kernighan describes "analog" as conveying "the idea of values that change
smoothly as something else changes" [@kernighan_d_2011, 21]. Much of the world
is analog, Kernighan explains. A water tap, a pen, or a car steering wheel are
all examples of analog interfaces. For example, when riding a bicycle, turning
the handlebars one way results in a corresponding motion of the machine. This
motion is smooth. Compare that with the action of a light switch. A properly
functioning light switch takes on two discrete states only: on or off. A range
of pressure applied to the switch does not correspond to any mechanical action
of the lever. But once a certain threshold is reached, the switch "flips" to
change states. "Digital systems," as Kernighan writes, "deal with discrete
values" [@kernighan_d_2011, 22]. The switch contains a limited number of state
possibilities, where the bicycle handlebars could be rotated in an infinite
number of minutely differing gradations.

Nelson Goodman was one of the first philosophers to examine digital
representation in the context of aesthetic theory. In the late 1960s, drawing
on technical intuitions about devices like pressure gauges and computers he
proposed to call those notational systems "analog" that are "dense" and
"undifferentiated in the extreme." By contrast, he called digital systems
those that are "discontinuous" and "differentiated throughout"
[@goodman_languages_1968, 159-164]. By this definition, written language and
music notation are digital systems par excellence, having the property of
reducing the undifferentiated, analog input (human thought) into discrete
semantic units (text or musical notation).[^ln3-goodman] Following Goodman's
logic one can reasonably maintain that the art of painting, unlike music or
language, cannot be reduced to the production of discrete semantic units, and
would be more of an analog system under the proposed definitions.

In this light, the language of pointillist painting, which breaks shapes down
into their modular atomic components, transforms an analog art form into a
digital one. Similarly, in the cuboid world of *Minecraft*, players interact
with blocks: smallest differentiated units that constitute all other more
complex things in the game. The world of *Minecraft* is sparse and therefore
digital. By contrast, the world of the hyper-realistic *Myst* depicts the
painting-like, semantically irregular reality that cannot be broken down into
neat components. *Myst*, a digital game, depicts a dense, undifferentiated,
and analog world.

Goodman's definitions thus strain under closer examination. Plainly, *Myst* is
also a digital game. All digital images (and worlds) follow the logic of
cubism to its deconstructive conclusion in that they atomize analog quantities
into discrete and differentiated points of light. The world of *Myst* like the
world of *Minecraft* is made of pixels. At some deeper level of analysis, both
worlds are sparse and differentiated throughout. Could we not say the same
thing about all rule based analog games, like chess? On the level of syntax,
Chess is also a sparse game, discrete and differentiated throughout like its
computer counterparts. One plays on top of a grid with pieces that move
according to rigidly proscribed rules and along binary color distinctions. At
another scale of analysis however, chess is an analog game. The wood grain of
the chess board is part of a dense, undifferentiated world. At a deeper level
still, at the atomic scale of observation, the chess board again begins to
appear sparse, discontinuous, and differentiated throughout. We are left
without the critical means to tell wood-and-(faux)ivory chess pieces apart
from block-and-pixel pieces of *Minecraft*.

The quality of being digital seems to depend on our perspective. Density and
sparseness changes with the viewer's ability to perceive differentiation.
Ultimately, these qualities belong not to the object of representation---chess
or computer game---but to the viewer. In the 1980s, philosophers engaging with
Goodman's earlier work, began to move away from discussing digital
representation in terms of the properties of the medium. The conversation
moved towards a more process-based, viewer-depended understanding of the
terms.

For example, an interesting corollary to the continuous property of analog
systems is our inability to duplicate their states exactly. I can approximate
the pressure someone else puts on their bicycle handlebars with some arbitrary
measure of precision that never reaches perfect reproducibility. This means
also that while more digital art forms like literature are, in some sense,
perfectly reproducible, analog forms, like painting, are not. Following
similar reasoning, the American philosopher John Haugeland proposed to
consider the quality of being reproducible as essential to our understanding
of digital representation. Reproducibility, for Haugeland, involved "flawless
copying [...] and preservation" [@haugeland_analog_1981, 213]. To Goodman's
criteria of the digital, he therefore added the notion of "feasible
procedures," which lead to "positive" and "reliable" processes for reading and
writing digital tokens [@haugeland_analog_1981, 214].

Let us consider Haugeland's addenda in relation to some of our previous case
studies. Chess movements are patently reproducible. In fact, several
notational conventions exist exactly to ensure the perfect preservation and
reproducibility of chess games. These include the "descriptive" and "standard
algebraic" chess notations. Individual chess *sets*, by contrast, are not
perfectly reproducible. Each is a somewhat unique version of the same
"regulation" ideal. Importantly, sometimes drastic differences in the shape of
the figures and the materials used to make chess sets are not meaningful in
the context of the game. They may be meaningful to those collectors, who prize
certain chess sets for their rarity or craftsmanship. But "craftsmanship" or
"rarity" are not in themselves signifying properties that figure in the game
of chess. They are only meaningful in the "game" of collecting.

For some chess players, chess pieces are perfectly exchangeable. For others
they are not. Similarly, at the other extreme, we know that no amount of
copying can reproduce an original Rembrandt. Every aspect of the painting is
meaningful, including those not visible to the naked eye: like the traces of
other paintings or sketches hidden under the surface representation. This
would hold true even if an invented technique could make a perfect,
molecule-by-molecule, reproduction of Rembrandt paintings. The rules of fine
art collection demand an original work of art that preserves the provenance of
the artifact, including incidental bumps, scratches, and patina accrued
through history. Such marks carry no meaning "by the rules" of painting, but
they do carry meaning "by the rules" of collecting.

By Haugeland's definitions, painting is therefore an analog genre. But if one
were to disregard the rules of collecting, if one simply enjoyed looking at
beautiful pictures, they would be justified in treating painting as a
perfectly reproducible art form. Painting would, in essence, become more
similar to chess, that is a reproducible, digital medium. Similarly, our newly
found ability to reproduce something, pushes the artifact closer to the
digital side of the spectrum, even as the object itself has not changed. Its
ontological status shifts with the viewer's technological capabilities.

With regard to discreteness, moving images lie somewhere between the extremes
of competitive chess and fine art. In the case of the soap opera effect, we
may think of analog film as a series of still shots. For some purposes, these
still shots are reproducible in mass quantities, although not perfectly.
Multiple copies of each film reel are routinely distributed to multiple
cinemas. Each is "authentic" in the sense that is is sanctioned by the movie
studio. From another perspective, each frame is also an irreproducible work of
art, which like painting can accrue the patina of time, and in some context
attain value based on such unique properties as belonging to this or that
prominent film director. Could magnetic tapes become unique works of art by
similar logic? Imagine an early video tape that was handled by the late Elvis.
One could object that humans cannot observe magnetic traces directly; whatever
sense of valuable degradation or patina particular to magnetic storage media
is lost on the average human collector. An objection could be raised too that
video tapes were produced in much greater quantities than film. Should we then
impose an arbitrary cut-off point, a certain number of copies that once
exceeded take the work of art out of the aesthetic realm? What about the
obverse movement? In 2014, Wu-Tang Clan, a New York-based musical collective,
released an album digitally, on CD-ROM, but only in a single copy that cannot,
by contract be reproduced by its buyer [@wu-tang_clan_once_2014. See
@morris_selling_2015; @cohen_for_2016; @budnik_copyright_2016]? Is it a
digital or an analog artifact?

These thought experiments show that qualities like "reproducibility,"
"originality," "patina," and "authenticity" depend on an observer's capacities
to perceive them and not on any intrinsic property of the medium. Film and
video are reasonably "irreproducible series of paintings" and, from another
perspective, "perfectly copyable facsimiles." The adverbs themselves suggest
that our instrumental definitions are not essentializable, they depend on
ability.

In 2008, the philosopher Matthew Katz proposed two further important
theoretical qualifications to the digital-analog debate. First, he
distinguished between "format" and "medium." Second, he proposed that the
digital-analog distinction often depends on the observer. To illustrate these
two amendments, Katz imagined a measuring system that involves a supply of
marbles in a large beaker. We can thereby agree to use a "handful" as an
approximate unit of measurement with that system. Thus one can imagine a
situation in which the beaker contains "three handfuls of marbles." Katz's
system is analog, even though marbles themselves are a perfectly discrete
medium, because it establishes no precise convention to reproduce handfuls.
The marble-beaker system violates Haugeland's requirement for "positive and
reliable" standards of reproducibility. My two handfuls might be different
from yours due to the difference in the size or our hands.  Where the medium
(marbles) is discrete the format (handfuls) is analog.

The mechanism of measuring depends on the measurer. It is analog when we
cannot accurately perceive approximate quantities. Were humans able to
magically discern the exact number of water molecules in a beaker, previously
analog systems (like unmarked beakers) would in effect become digital.
Similarly, were humans endowed with hands of a definite size and volume,
"handfuls" would be counted as discrete and therefore digital quantities.
From similar thought experiments, Katz concludes that the physical,
perceptual, and cognitive capabilities of "users" (readers, audience,
perceivers) affect the ontological status of the system, a handful of marbles
or a work of art [@katz_analog_2008].

Katz's seemingly minor amendments to Haugeland entail several radical
consequences in practice. The physics of the medium, he reveals, are
significant only in so far as they are tied to our ability to impose order: to
format something. Whether a beaker is full of marbles or water is irrelevant.
What matters is our ability to structure the medium into exactly reproducible
chunks. We can do that with marbles by counting, but cannot with water.
Undifferentiated matter like cake is only analog until someone cuts it into
pieces. And the technique of cutting is important. The ontological status of
cake changes depending on the agent doing the cutting. For someone armed with
a laser cutter and a microscope the cake is, on a spectrum, a near perfect
digital medium. It is much more analog, alternatively, for those who eat with
their hands.

Our confusion about the dual status of *Myst* resolves when we introduce the
distinction between medium and format. *Myst* is digital for those who can
access the game's code, to take an obvious example. This binary layer is not
normally accessible at the site of the projection. Players cannot access the
game's discrete bits, which produce surface images. Players therefore perceive
computed scenery as indivisible, analog representation. The property of being
digital thus indicates the systematic ability to impose structure. *Myst* is
digital for a programmer and analog for the player. The quality of something
being digital in that sense separates those able to differentiate from those
who apprehend the differentiated structure holistically---recall Drucker and
McGann's "holistic repleteness of images" [@drucker_images_2010].

Further, note that from an instrumental point of view, to make something
digital, in Katz's final formulation, implies the separation of structure and
medium. The painting is wholly analog as long as it remains irreproducible. It
becomes digital when the viewer is able to impose structure, by which the
visual form is "lifted" from the medium of canvas. When taken outside of their
theoretical context, the affordances of reproduction---"flawless copying and
preservation" through "positive and reliable means"---acquire an immediate
practical significance. It is important to a librarian, for example, that a
document is preserved reliably and that it continues to be accessible to the
public. Reliability and accessibility are social, technological, and
institutional mechanisms. They vary by cultural and political contexts.

Once we see the terms---analog and digital---as instrumental properties, which
we impose onto media from without, we can better perceive their political, and
not vaguely metaphysical import, which relies on weakly essentialist notions
of the human. Truly digital text can be copied and placed into other hands and
minds, feasibly and reliably. The possibility of enacting such procedures is
what ultimately gives representation its digital form. Our senses limit our
ability to format: to impose structure onto media. We cannot, for example,
communicate in the infrared spectrum, without proper instrumentation. Our
ability to format media, to make it digital, is limited from without, by
political means. A classified document, for example, loses some of the
necessary digital preconditions. One is literally not allowed to copy it. It
has to remain embedded within this particular piece of paper on this
particular desk.

Technologies like "digital rights management" (DRM), which limit a reader's
ability to copy books similarly transform digital content into its
media-dependent, irreproducible, and ultimately analog forms. Paradoxically, a
paper-and-ink book that places no restrictions on copying and transmediation
is, in a sense, a more digital format than a restricted electronic book.
Arbitrary restrictions to digital formats create class distinctions between
those with and those without permissions to copy, share, and transform.

The word, already a discrete quantity, comes into digital being as form when
coupled loosely to its material contexts. Ontologically, text is by nature a
digital format: first because it represents discrete units of information
about the world, and second, because it allows for some measure of "flawless
copying and preservation." Copying and preservation constitute the logic
compelling the historical advancement of writing. "Flawless copying and
preservation" are in themselves contingent, and not essential, properties of
writing. Human language operates in the digital mode then, as long as it is
continues to participate in the unhindered trans-mediation of thought---from
mind states to voice, from voice to paper, from paper to wire, and thence to
other mind states. Without such chains of transmission there can be no
culture, in the sense that culture constitutes a shared intellectual
achievement. I participate in that collective endeavour in so far as I am free
to unburden my thoughts from their natural medium, my brain. I speak out loud,
I write thoughts down on paper, I pass notes to others. In the extreme, analog
logic entails total censorship. Purely analog thoughts would be ones that
could never leave their origins. Media independence, in that sense, transcends
the intellectual confines of an individual. Without digital portability, all
representation---art and knowledge---attaches itself irrecoverably to
untranslatable and irreproducible conditions of their production.

Imagine a world in which ideas forever "adhere" to their brain-bound media.
Imagine also a society that positively prohibits the transmediation of
thought, on paper or between brain cells. Envision extreme forms of thought
control that restrict fundamental basics of speech and literacy, prohibiting
the manufacture of pens, paper, computers, photocopiers, voice recorders, and
word processors. Such prohibitions would amount to total censorship. A
radically analog society would also be wholly mute.

Understanding digitality as an kind of order, a format that arranges matter in
certain ways tied to particular affordances of specific devices, recasts the
history of computing into something other than simple "mathesis," the idea
that computation reduces the world into more discrete, and therefore
computable, elements. That notion would be true if the computer was simply a
glorified calculator. But computers are more than that. In practice, they
reveal themselves to be self-amending machines for universal transmediation
---machines that, depending on the user's acuity and dispensation to access
deep structure, separate readers into those for whom texts and images exist as
fixed analog given and those for whom they exist in a fluid form. Computation
implies the ability to impose structure onto the world: a liberty to exchange
one symbolic order for another among signs, people, and machines.

## The Medium Is Not the Message

In examining the material conditions of digital representation we find
format---a quality distinct from both medium and content---emerging as a
political construct that governs the physical affordances of communication.
Where we started with vague intuitions about the essence of digital
representation, we end on firmer ground, at which formatting identifies the
tactical ability to impose structure onto the medium. Formatting matters
because it frames the mode of media apprehension. How the cake is cut also
determines how we eat it. To format text without margins, for example, is also
to deny marginalia. And to format a text in a way that prevents further
remediation is to deny the formation of shared culture.

Critics like Fish and Golumbia are rightfully suspicious of unexamined claims
about digitization. But they are suspicious for the wrong reasons.
Digitization threatens humanity only in so far that it lays claim on the
recipient of the message. It can facilitates understanding by shaping
undifferentiated blocks of text into paragraphs, by giving space to
annotation. But formatting can also hinder apprehension. It can structure
attention in ways that discourages or outright prevents critical thought.

In his influential essay on the political quality of technological artifacts,
Langdon Winner famously argued that in modern times "people are often willing
to make drastic changes in the way they live to accord with technological
innovation" where they would, at the same time, "resist similar kinds of
changes justified on political grounds" [@winner_artifacts_1980, 135]. The
insight is yet to filter into literary studies. Readers, writers, and critics
who would be pained to support legislation in favor of literary censorship or
surveillance, effectively promote such systems in daily use. The mismatch
between political belief and practice comes from the lack of critical
engagement with technology, which as Winner writes, requires "both the study
of specific technical systems and their history as well as a thorough grasp of
the concepts and controversies of political theory" [@winner_artifacts_1980,
135]. Winner elucidates this dynamic through the case study of Robert Moses
and his twentieth century highway building projects in New York. Moses built
low overpasses with an eye towards discouraging bus travel, which reflected
his social and racial biases. These in effect carried the force of
legislation, Moses argued, denying people of color and the poor access to
public spaces [@winner_artifacts_1980].

Similarly, in our case, claims on a reader's attention can happen through
legislation, by social convention, or through specific material affordances,
like the inability to take notes or to share books among family and friends.
Such technological constraints disproportionately affect those most reliant on
informal knowledge networks, which exist outside of economies of wealth and
prestige. Digitizing the public archive without a thorough understanding of
the platforms and technologies involved risks committing the public to an
empty and impoverished vision of social knowledge production. Technologies
that hinder "feasible procedures" for reliable "copying and preservation"
create textual artifacts less, not more, digital than paper books. They push
us towards privatized knowledge economies. To "read" becomes to "purchase
temporary reading rights"; note-taking becomes commodified; personal reading
habits, long protected by our libraries, become a matter for bureaucratic
control.

Consider the seemingly innocuous decision to distribute scientific literature
formatted in the ubiquitous Adobe Portable Document Format (.pdf). Adobe, the
American company responsible for introducing the file format into circulation,
describes it as "allow[ing] the faithful, high-quality reproduction of printed
matter in electronic form" [@shore_acrobat_1995, 379]. Text, when transmitted
without formatting specifications, loses its shape to some extent. Think about
writing an email for example. What appears to you as lines of a certain width,
may appear to the recipient in a completely different form. You may have
written your email on a large stationary monitor, for example, where your
recipient reads on a small, portable device. Because formatting is not fixed,
email programs are able to reflow the lines appropriately. You have in essence
delegated the responsibility for formatting the text to the reader's device.
Readers are then free to apprehend it in a manner most convenient for them:
tailored to their specific needs, attention spans, and body types. The
downside of having this freedom is that the sender cannot assure excellence in
formatting. The reader's software may render the text poorly or make it
outright unreadable.

The PDF solves this problem by guaranteeing its recipient receive the message
exactly as written, without delegating the responsibility of rendering it to
the reader. In essence, the format mimics the constraints of the printed page,
which similarly preserves the shape of the message during transmission. When
writing a letter by hand, you know that your recipient will see what you see,
in the same shape and form. But to achieve the effect, the portable document
format must also limit the document's viewing possibilities. Thus if the
sender fixes the width of the page to the standard legal letter size, the
reader would be pained to read such a document on a smaller, portable device.
The PDF converts an essentially textual, that is digital format, into a visual
one. Strictly speaking, PDF documents do not contain text, in a way that an
email does. Rather, they contain text like a photograph of a printed page
does, as an image. Such constraint is useful for business communication, when
writing contracts for example. The party responsible for drafting the contract
wants to know that it would signed without alteration.

Yet for other purposes, such fixity of formatting is detrimental to
communication.  Where reading paper contracts sent through the mail is free,
the reading of PDF documents requires specialized software, which may cost
money. PDF further hinders the copying and the preservation of text---the
formal prerequisites for digital media. The simple act of taking notes becomes
a paid feature of the Adobe Acrobat software. What was gained in a minor (for
scholarly communication) convenience of formatting is lost in a major
concession to the privatization of public knowledge. We have in effect
instituted a document format that is less flexible than paper. Because
"copying and preservation" are key values for university libraries, the loss
of unimpeded "copying and preservation" should outweigh any gains in purely
ornamental stability of document format. This does not mean that we should not
use Adobe Acrobat files, only that we must, in all cases, be intellectually
invested in the compromises involved.

Technology does not determine literature: it has only the potential to
hide implicit mechanisms of machine control, or, to offer possibilities for
transformation into other forms of textuality. Loosely coupled to its material
contexts, text can continue its relentless drive from matter to idea and into
other matters as long as its passage is not hampered by regimes that prohibit
further sharing, remixing, and transmediation. I say nothing yet of the
potential necessity of such regulation. Under certain conditions, in the name
of privacy, security, or property rights, it may become necessary to flatten
out and to treat text as more of an analog, media-bound modality of
communication, limited in its ability to move across minds and cultures. But,
it is also in our broadly human, civic interest to keep such mechanisms of
constraint visible to view, under continual scrutiny of critical, close, and
closest possible reading.

[^ln3-ndc]: Also known as the "single current" or "single Morse" system
@welk_neutral_2000. The later International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2 (ITA2), a
convention that preceded ASCII, could also be adopted to work with "double
current" devices, in which case 0 would represent "negative current" and 1
"positive current" [@itu_telegraph_1932, 36].

[^ln3-tele]: See for example @angell_pro_2009, 233: "The telegraph is a
digital device, sending only high and low pulses through the wire." In
@jepsen_my_2001, 195: "The telegraph was a digital device that used dots and
dashes in a manner similar to the ones and zeroes of digital logic." In
@comer_internet_2006, 32: "The telegraph is a digital device because instead
of sending a continuous signal that is an exact analog of the input, the
telegraph clicks to send the individual characters."

[^ln3-cont]: Gregory Hickok, a prominent UC Irvine cognitive scientist wrote:
"The brain samples the world in rhythmic pulses, perhaps even discrete time
chunks, much like the individual frames of a movie. From the brain's
perspective, experience is not continuous but quantized [...] This is not to
say that the brain dances to its own beat, dragging perception along for the
ride. In fact, it seems to work the other way around: Rhythms in the
environment, such as those in music or speech, can draw neural oscillations
into their tempo, effectively synchronizing the brain's rhythms with those of
the world around us." See @hickok_its_2015.

[^ln3-maley]: See for example @maley_analog_2011, 117: "the received view is
that analog representations vary smoothly, while digital representations vary
in stepwise manner. In other words, 'digital' is synonymous with 'discrete,'
while 'analog' is synonymous with 'continuous.'" See also @kittler_there_1995:
"Confronted as they are with a continuous environment of weather, waves, and
wars, digital computers can cope with this real number-avalanche only by
adding element to element."

[^ln3-goodman]: Goodman differentiates between "syntactic" and "semantic"
density. Some notational systems like writing and the decimal system are,
according to Goodman, "syntactically differentiated but semantically dense."
The key distinction for him seems to be a "limit on the length of message," by
which I think he means something related to infinite divisibility. The decimal
system as a whole can continue to approach a quantity indefinitely, reaching
an arbitrary point of precision.  The computer limits decimal precision to
some arbitrary "depth" of approximation, making it semantically discrete. I
find this part of the argument unconvincing. See @goodman_languages_1968,
161-4.

[^ln3-oed]: The Oxford English Dictionary suggests "medium: any physical
material (as tape, disk, paper, etc.) used for recording or reproducing data,
images, or sound." Consult @oed_medium_2001.

[^ln3-siegert]: Siegert takes the Virag as an "apocryphal" emblem of a
"systemic...logic" in the "dominant cultural technique," representative of the
"order of digital signals." Although not concerned with the history or
philosophy of digital media explicitly, Siegert suggests that the writing
telegraph symbolizes the cleansing of "the noise of all graphic form." His
theory of cultural techniques instead creates "an awareness for the plenitude
of a world of as yet undistinguished things, that, as an inexhaustible
reservoir of possibilities, remain the basic point of reference for every type
of culture." The world of undistinguished things hints his position on the
analog side of continues-discrete dichotomy of human experience. Quotes from
@siegert_cacography_2011, 41, 32, & 35.

[^ln3-dervish]: One could make more of Dervish orientalism here. Murray
himself was an empire outsider, born in the small, remote town of
Invercargill, New Zealand (a town that also happens to be one of the
southern-most cities in world). "I am a child of the Southern Cross," he wrote
in *Philosophy of Power*, "and I have no preordained respect for geniuses born
under the Northern constellations." See @murray_philosophy_1939, 51.

[^ln3-swedenborg]: See @swedenborg_treatise_1778, 24 regarding the "gross
error of those who assert the materiality of the soul, affirming it to be
homogeneous, and continuous with the body; whereas it is heterogeneous, and
discrete." It is otherwise in the "Angelic Idea of Creation," see
@swedenborg_apocalypse_1901, 290. "The question was asked, 'Whence, then, is
hell?' They [angels] said, 'From man's freedom, without which a man would not
be a man,' because man, from that freedom, broke the continuity in himself;
and this being broken, separation took place; and the continuity, which was in
him from creation, became like a chain, or a piece of linked work, which falls
to pieces when the hooks above are broken or torn out, and then hangs down
from small threads. Separation or rupture was brought about, and is brought
about, by the denial of God."

[^ln3-digital]: For a summary of digital physics and metaphysics see
@steinhart_digital_1998 and @floridi_against_2009.

[^ln3-bergsonism]: See @bergson_creative_1944, 36. On the rather complex topic
of discrete vs. continuous multiplicities in Bergsonian thought see also
@james_pluralistic_1909 and @deleuze_bergsonism_1990.

[^ln5-apriori]: A priori because one must already inhabit the category (of
being human) to engage in its analysis.

[^ln5-underwater]: For a detailed description of contemporary digital
infrastructure see @starosielski_undersea_2015.

[^ln3-mishima]: See @mishima_novel_2004.

[^ln3-wall]: It would be interesting to try to create the reverse effect by
reducing the fidelity of a "cheap" soap opera video feed to the more
"expensive" look of film shot at 24 frames per second.

[^ln4-construction]: For a primer on both sides of social constructivism see
@hacking_social_1999 and @boghossian_fear_2007.

[^ln4-opera]: Yet other techniques of apprehension are socially constructed.
Thus although all opera is in the human-audible frequency range, acculturation
to opera listening helps greatly in its enjoyment. Some aspects of opera
appreciation are learned (like knowing the plot) where others are determined
(like the ability to hear sounds).

\newpage

