# Chapter 6: Copy

## Intro

The reading of short stories, novels, poetry, and plays is at grave risk,
concluded the last survey of Public Participation in the Arts conducted by the
Census Bureau on the behest of the National Endowments for the Arts (NEA). 

> For the first time in modern history, less than half of the adult population
> now reads literature, and those trends reflect a larger decline in other
> sorts of reading. Anyone who loves literature, or values the cultural,
> intellectual, and political importance of active and engaged literacy
> [...] will respond to this report with grave concern" [@nea_reading_2004,
> vii]. 

Contrary to the report's findings, numbers about textuality at large tell a
different and an entirely more optimistic story.

On an average day in 2008, at home, an average American read around 100,500
words a day. At 250 words per page, that is around 402 printed pages. Between
the years of 1980 and 2008, the consumption of information in bytes---a measure
that would obviously privilege storage-heavy content like sound and
video---grew at a modest 5.4 percent per year. Reading, in decline until the
advent of the internet, has tripled in the same period. Reading in print
accounted for 26 percent of verbal information consumed in 1960. That number
fell to 9 percent in 2008, but the consumption of words digitally increased to
27 percent of total consumption, which means that reading has increased its
share of the overall household attention span [@bohn_how_2009;
@hilbert_worlds_2011; @hilbert_info_2012]. The first decade of the twenty-first
century saw a 20 percent increase in library visitation
[@u.s._institute_of_museum_and_library_services_public_2010]. According to
UNESCO data, literacy rates continue to rise globally, as the world calibrates
imbalances of access along the lines of gender and geography
[@huebler_adult_2013]. By a conservative estimate, the number of scientific
publications grows at about 4.7 percent per year, which means that the amount
of published research roughly doubles every 15 years or so (and the numbers are
much, much higher in some fields) [@archambault_welcome_2005;
@crespi_empirical_2008; @larsen_rate_2010]. The number of books published in
the United States almost tripled from 2005 to 2009 [@bowker_u.s._2009]. All
measures point to a drastic expansion of the textual field. Something does not
add up. As a society we are reading, writing, and publishing more each year.
With these figures in mind, I ask: What is at risk, literature, or merely one
of its many definitions? Does the diffusion of the textual field somehow
cheapen the literary enterprise of art for art's sake, or protect it? What is
the source of modern metaphysical anxiety about the status of literary text?

In the 1990s, the ire of the metaphysically disaffected coursed against visual
culture and television [@stephens_rise_1998; @merrin_television_1999]. A decade
later it turned against the internet and computation, which to many threaten
the very foundations of humanity and the humanities [@golumbia_cultural_2009;
@fish_digital_2012; @marche_literature_2012].[^ln2-internet] My thesis,
presented here and throughout, is that the aims of such metaphysical angst are
misaligned. Reconstructing the physical conditions of textuality, the work
begun in the first chapter of the book, makes plain the profound alienation
from material contexts of literary production on the part of readers and
authors. Although literacy thrives, the very nature of what constitutes a
literary text changes with the advent of new material conditions. Changing
circumstances destabilize established modes of literary production, access, and
distribution tied to the circulation of paper and ink.

[^ln2-internet]: The NEA study has this to say on the topic of "What is
responsible for the decline of literary reading?": "If the 2002 data represent
a declining trend, it is tempting to suggest that fewer people are reading
literature and now prefer visual and audio entertainment. Again, the
data---both from SPPA and other sources---do not readily quantify this
explanation [...] the Internet, however, could have played a role. During the
time period when the literature participation rates declined, home Internet use
soared" [@nea_reading_2004, 30]. In his 2004 *Humanism and Democratic
Criticism*, Edward Said wrote about the "fundamental irreconcilability between
the aesthetic and the non-aesthetic," which must be sustained "as a necessary
condition of our work as humanists." The aesthetic exists in opposition to
"quotidian" experiences that we all share, writes Said: "To read Tolstoy,
Mahfouz, or Melville, to listen to Bach, Duke Ellington, or Elliott Carter, is
to do something different from reading the newspaper or listening to the taped
music you get while the phone company or your doctor puts you on hold." A
corollary to my main thesis is an argument against that commonly held belief
about the relationship between literature and aesthetics. To my mind, the
distinction is impossible to define, let alone maintain in practice. Bias in
favor of the aesthetic is bias in favor of a specific, historically  and
materially  contingent idea of the aesthetic. That preconceived idea carries
with it a hidden cost, introducing numerous blind spots into the study of
literature at large, limiting the critical task in scope and relevance. Textual
diffusion threatens not the humanity (or the humanities), but the existing
socioeconomic order that governs who gets to access, to interpret, and to
archive literature as text and document. I begin with several propositions
then: one that the literary field, understood in broad terms, is expanding, and
two, that with a quantitative expansion comes qualitative change in the
material makeup of the literary field. Where I start with a top-down,
theoretical reconceptualization of literature as an epistemological category, I
end with a bottom-up media history that traces the passage of pixel into text.

When surveying the introductory literature on literature, the reader will
invariably find a version of Said's "fundamental irreconcilability" position.
For example, in Austin Warren and Renee Wellek's *Theory of Literature* the
authors write that the "term 'literature' seems best if we limit it to the art
of literature, that is, to imaginative literature [...] the main distinctions
to be drawn are between the literary, the everyday, and the scientific uses of
language" [@wellek_theory_1949, 22]. Similarly, Raymond Williams defines it to
mean "mainly poems and plays and novels," as opposed to other kinds of
"serious" writing that are "general," "discursive," or "the sub-literary"
[@williams_keywords_1976, 152-153].[^ln2-engell] Sharing a bias in favor of
aesthetic reading with my colleagues, I would rather spend my free time reading
Kincaid or Coetzee than poring over arcane printer and telegraph manuals.
Implicit in that bias is an idea---professed by Immanuel Kant, Friedrich
Schiller, and, more recently, Tzvetan Todorov and Elaine Scarry---linked with
the belief in the connection between beauty and justice, beauty and the good,
beauty and the upright moral life. I wish to avoid disturbing the foundations
of that intellectual edifice, and only want to point out that, for some, beauty
can also reside outside of artful discourse, and that others find beauty in the
strangest of places, and that texts---their movement within and across
cultures---present many problems not exhausted by the ethic or the aesthetic
realms. Reading fiction (of a kind) for pleasure (of a kind) may indeed be a
vanishing pastime, but that is not to say that our society has gotten less
interested in literature of all kinds. On the contrary, whole new disciplines
have sprung up to deal with textual saturation: natural language processing,
narrative generation, automatic translation and summarization, computational
text analysis, discourse analysis, corpus linguistics, and digital humanities
among others.

Matters always central to the field of literary studies remain vitally
important to the functioning of modern society. Literary studies, when
conceived broadly, provide fertile grounds for collaboration between diverse
disciplines interested in the changing dynamics of narrative, interpretation,
language, form, prosody, composition, dialog, discourse, story, genre,
authorship, influence, and text. It is in this core conceptual cluster of
operational terms that I want to locate a notion of poetics, poetics capable of
addressing not only the machinations of poetry and prose, but also of pixel,
code, string, script, inscription, list, document, file, record, project, and
archive. Rather than picky epicureans of high lit, I imagine my fellow
travelers as voracious omnivores of text. My polemical aside in this chapter is
not meant to re-introduce, much less argue for a side in contentious binary
distinctions along which meta-commentary of this sort usually unfolds: science
vs. the humanities, close reading vs. distant reading. In conceiving a field of
activity to make space for this book, I cast my vote note for ether/or but for and.

This is not to say that I advocate
ignorance, nor do I follow the Russian formalist poet Vladimir Mayakovksy, who
at the beginning of the last century called on his peers to "cast Pushkin,
Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, et al. overboard from the ship of Modernity." foobar
citation I hold instead that in the implicit perusal of the subjectively
beautiful discourse literary scholars have abandoned vast and fecund textual
vistas. In privileging the aesthetic, the study of Literature has tied its fate
to that of an increasingly vanishing pastime---the leisurely reading of poetry
and fiction, of a specific kind, holding a privileged form, sold in preferred
manner.

Hampered by an artificially limited field of activity, the study of literature
so conceived excavates a small, sacred patch of ground at the tip of an immense
textual iceberg. The results of that strenuous activity sink to join the mass
of its submerged and excavated bottom. Texts multiply and produce other texts:
that's more or less the point of Roland Barthes's 250-page exegesis of a
30-page short story by Honoré de Balzac. Despite my fond appreciation of
Barthes as a scholar, I suspect that exponential growth and diminishing returns
will eventually make (if not already have made) such relentlessly exegetic mode
of scholarship unsustainable. There are, by my approximation, over 20,000
monographs on Balzac,[^ln2-balzac] and at least as many scholarly articles on
*S/Z*.[^ln2-barthes] The value of each new "Barthes" and his associated
commentary plummets as texts multiply exponentially, quickly reaching the
limits of human comprehension. There are no winners in such an arms race
between "primary texts" and footnotes: only eventual irrelevance.

[^ln2-balzac]: Search query `ti:Balzac` at OCLC Worldcat.
[^ln2-barthes]: Search query `Barthes AND Balzac` using Google Scholar.

Non-positivistic disciplines like literary studies lack a methodology for
definitively settling any research program. For this reason, where the sciences
usually defer to the "last word" on any given question, citation patterns in
the humanities journals indicate that the humanities privilege historically
established sources [@tenen_digital_2014]. Without robust mechanisms for
condensing and for pruning accepted knowledge, the archive expands
precipitously. Its combined weight necessarily devalues the literature of the
present, creating a curious kind of a gap in contemporary material. A
"modernist" in literary studies denotes a specialist who works on documents
which are now more than a century old. And most departments of literature cover
only a limited range of best-sellers from the post-WWII period. A competent
graduate literature student can likely name a dozen or so contemporaneous
literary movements emerging at the turn of the twentieth century. Few in the
field are likely to name more than a handful at the turn of the
twenty-first.[^ln2-survey]

The logic of Said's eloquent defense of the aesthetic merely continues a
tradition of exclusionary distinction-making, which, before Said, denied
writers like Naguib Mahfouz and musicians like Duke Ellington a place in the
curriculum. The logic of exclusion on aesthetic basis places the critic in the
awkward role of a taste-maker, limiting research to texts that in a sense were
already "blessed" by the establishment. Scholars working on "lesser" or
"unknown" texts and writers must expend considerable energy justifying the
aesthetic merits of their chosen subject. At stake in the binary logic of
aestheticism are the very notions of "beautiful" and "quotidian" as markers of
prestige---notions that encourage disciplinary infighting, tug-of-war style, by
which much energy is spent in struggling to pull material from one category
into the other. In the meantime, the shoring up of the aesthetic detracts from
the larger aims of literary scholarship, reducing literature to its ornamental
function, as a "neat illustration" for otherwise empirical accounts of the
human condition.[^ln2-menand]

[^ln2-menand]: I am echoing Louis Menand's "the version of the humanities that
would make many non-humanists most comfortable today is the version in which
art and literature are ornaments on or neat illustrations of empirical accounts
of human life" [@menand_dangers_2005, 10-17]. 

To limit the literary to a historically contingent ideal of the aesthetic is to
limit the project of literary analysis to a moralizing, prescriptive
enterprise. A whole tradition of Marxist criticism reminds readers that
prescription cannot be ideologically neutral. "Literature does not exist in the
sense that insects do," Terry Eagleton writes in his introduction to literary
theory. "Value judgments by which it is constituted are historically variable,"
he concludes, having "a close relation to social ideologies." For Eagleton,
values are more than the simple assertion of private taste. Instead, they refer
to assumptions "by which certain social groups exercise and maintain control
over others [@eagleton_criticism_1976, 15-47]." Who controls what? My
interpretation of Marxist materialism is considerably more literal than
Eagleton's. I am interested here in physical mechanisms of control, not only in
their more ephemeral ideological justifications.

In trying to reconcile the NEA's dour prognoses with broad theoretical models
and demographic trends that reflect a proliferation of textual material, I am
confronted with two possible explanations. The writers of the report hint at
the first themselves: treating the ebb of literary reading (in a particular
mode) as cause and symptom for the general decline of the arts (and perhaps of
civilization itself). I find that reading unacceptable, (a) because it is
depressing and (b) because it smacks of historical exceptionalism. I strongly
suspect that humanity's potential for innovation and creativity has remained
relatively stable throughout history. The literary ecosystem is as vibrant and
as diverse as ever. Material conditions for creative expression change (as in
times of political oppression, pestilence, or war), where the spirit endures.

The second, much more palatable (and likely) explanation would question the
very definitions of literary reading. Consider the possibility of online or
digital literature that evolves according to a logic of its own, where previous
ideas of "genre" or "literary movements" no longer apply. To restrict literary
reading to "novels, short stories, plays, and poetry" (as is done in the NEA
report) is to deny some measure of literariness to song-writing, computer
game-making, software design, and, in an obvious way, to non-fiction or, let's
say, to essays of arbitrary length. Imagine, for example, excluding reality
television from the survey on television habits, because the genre does not
conform to some normative sense of what television should be. Do the literary
survey-makers consider literature as a medium, like television, or a grab-bag
of "serious genres" like comedy and drama? As it turns out: both. The authors
concede the point in sometimes classifying readers by the number of books read
in any genre, effectively equating literature with "books" [@nea_reading_2004].
But even that concession confuses form with function. What if "reading a book"
begins to involve something other than moving one's eyes from left to right
over sequentially numbered blocks of text? Or what if books were more like
pills, or prosthetics, than parchment? The conundrum reveals a strong
methodological bias favoring historically contingent (and likely modernist)
conceptions of the literary. A report that initially looks like objective,
quantitative, descriptive analysis (that's the way things are) hides a
qualitative, proscriptive program (that's the way they should be).

[^ln2-engell]: See also @engell_teaching_1988.

Starting with the late 1960s, a
generation of scholars (Northrup Frye, Murray Krieger, and E. D. Hirsch, among
others) took up the problem of value in literary criticism in a concerted
fashion. Their conversation splintered into three camps: the
separatists---those who viewed the production of value as a detriment to the
discipline; the inseparatists (to coin a term)---those who believed that value
creation is inseparable from the study of literature; and the compatibilists,
or those who attempted to integrate the two opposing positions. Frye, for one,
argued that value production should not be a part of the scholar's task,
because the concept of value itself is "individual, unpredictable, variable,
incommunicable, indemonstrable, and mainly an intuitive reaction to knowledge."
"The more consistently one conceives of criticism as the pursuit of values,"
wrote Frye, "the more firmly one becomes attached to that great sect of
anti-intellectualism" [@frye_value_1968, 317]. Ever the dry wit, Frye wrote
that one can pursue a sense of value no more than one can pursue a sense of
happiness. Values, like happiness, are not end-goals in themselves, but rather
"emotional reaction[s] to activity" and a "feeling we get from pursuing
something else" [@frye_value_1968, 311].

To this Murray Krieger responded by pointing out the inevitability of value
formation in the work of even the most analytically inclined critic. Krieger
writes: "The categories [of the literary, the poetic] define their subject and
erect value criteria for admission, so that for the work to attain the
definition is for it to qualify as a valued individual in a valued class. The
work comes to be discovered, defined, and valued as poetry only by way of a
preexisting generic characteristic which the critic began by adopting as his
perspective glass to envision it [foobar sense]." All this just to say that
even for scholars like Frye, the process of valuation happens before the
encounter with the text. In designating the poem as a poem, the critic already
has brought with her a set of preconceived notions that distinguish what
constitutes poetry, and what does not; who is in and who is out. From this
viewpoint, abjuring the task of explicit value formation borders on the
irresponsible.

Critics like E. D. Hirsch offered a compromise between these two positions,
arguing that although value-making contaminates all acts of interpretation, the
scholar can and should adopt an interrogatory stance towards value creation as
such, which ultimately allows her to "form new judgments of value and
significance" [@hirsch_literary_1968, 331]. In this camp we also find
"Contingencies of Value," by Barbara Herrnstein Smith, published in 1983. At
the time, Smith urged her peers to make the examination of social
value-creating mechanisms a part of their academic discipline. "What are
commonly taken to be *signs* of literary value, are also its *springs*," Smith
writes [@smith_contingencies_1983, 30]. And the springs unmistakably push the
whole enterprise towards the Western, economically privileged model of the
canon. Texts that persist in the teaching and the selling of literature survive
as long as they do not radically subvert the prevailing ideology. Smith stops
short of offering a way out. For even as the canon grows to include previously
excluded voices, those voices take on the shape of soft acquiescence. The
custodians of the Western canon "cannot grasp or acknowledge" that alternative
forms of literariness and textuality can take on the functions of Dante or
Homer for others [@hirsch_literary_1968, 1-35]. I am appropriately galvanized
by Smith's fiery rhetoric, but must admit that not much has changed since the
1980s. Her compromise simply does not approach the very peculiarity of the
question itself. Must we value the object of our study?

To understand the peculiarity of the question, try asking: Does an
anthropologist observing cock fighting, condone animal cruelty? Does a
historian writing about war, sanction violence? Does a philosopher working on
the problem of other minds, love solipsism? In each case, synonyms for
value-making---loving, sanctioning, condoning---appear out of place,
incongruent with the inquiry at hand. Something is rotten in the very
formulation of the query. To put it differently: Must we study *only* what we
value? I cannot think of a way to defend the answer to the affirmative. A
zoology that singularly insists on the study of beautiful animals is itself a
strange creature.[^ln2-zoo] A more radical compromise compels us to seek value
in the importance of the inquiry itself: in the quality of the questions
raised, and in the relevance of the answers given. If literary reading of a
certain kind has the power ascribed to it by the NEA report (increased civic
participation, etc.), literary humanities need not concern themselves with the
protection of the literary. The survival of the field depends on the freedom of
its cadres to pursue the literary function everywhere, indiscriminately. A more
neutral and broad consideration of literary domain can include and preserve all
extant forms of textuality.

[^ln2-zoo]: There are several studies that explore
the effect of perceived aesthetics on zoology and conservation. See esp.
@stokes_things_2007; @frynta_are_2009. The short of it: cute animals get more
funding.

I am trying to burrow (impatiently, because the archive is thick, and the
bedrock far) from a big idea, like literature, down to its more modest textual
forms, and into the material substratum underlying all print media---paper,
digital, or otherwise. For this, I will need an operational definition of
literature, free (to the extent it is possible) from its normative spectres:
something like "systemic application of textuality to human life," and
textuality as "the site of literary activity." But I am not yet ready to move
beyond the obvious tautology.

The Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC),
the organization responsible for the controversial Common Core standards being
implemented in schools across the United States today, promotes close reading
as "thorough," "methodical," and "analytical" practice that "enables students
to reflect on the meanings of individual words and sentences; the order in
which sentences unfold; and the development of ideas over the course of the
text, which ultimately leads students to arrive at an understanding of the
text as a whole" [@parcc_parcc_2012, 7]. The general movement here is from
"text" on the page to "work" (text as a whole, in the language of the report).
The model of textuality implicit in the institutional project of close reading
assumes an environment of received literary canons, naturally accessible to
the human intellect. For the duration of the "Gutenberg galaxy," the age of
print, a well-educated person might have been expected to internalize some
several hundred or perhaps thousands of major texts constituting the canon.
Close reading was honed to operate on that naturalized scale.

That poet's dude's impossible to read.

The expansion of the textual field has radically increased the cognitive
demands of literary engagement. The pipeline between text and work has
lengthened considerably. On the one side, the matter of canon formation can no
longer be relegated to stable, long-term systems of social filtering. Seen
from the perspective of a literary interface, the database, the social stream,
and the search engine are tools for dynamic, "on the fly," generative
canon-formation. Consider the task of finding an unknown (to me) factoid
online, about philosophy in the times of Andalusian Spain, for example. Where
in the past I might have started with a subject catalog compiled by
librarians, today I construct a search query, using resources that I believe
will return a reasonably authoritative list of texts on the subject. The
search engine, in effect, replaces (or rather complements) centuries-long
processes of canon-formation. A near-instantaneous list of results now becomes
my ephemeral, but nevertheless authoritative, collection of relevant
literature.

Each text in the returned list still requires the instrumentation of close,
analytical interpretation. However, the same discipline of critical and
reflective deliberation exercised on the level of an individual text needs to
also be exercised on the level of procedurally generated search engine
results: Where to search? Using what engine? How to construct the query? What
are the implicit biases of the system?  The academic question of
canon-formation transforms into a (not yet critical) practice of rapid,
iterative, generative canon-making. Whatever ideals motivate close reading
between "text" and "work" surely must drive the process on the level of
dynamic corpus composition.

The various practices of distant reading arise from the condition in which
canons are no longer accessible, in their entirety, to the unaided (natural)
human intellect. These include distant reading and macroanalysis in literary
studies [@jockers_macroanalysis_2013; @moretti_distant_2013], culturomics in
economy [@aiden_uncharted:_2014], e-discovery in law
[@scheindlin_electronic_2004; @scheindlin_electronic_2009], automatic essay
evaluation in education [@shermis_handbook_2013], and medical informatics in
medicine [@shortliffe_biomedical_2013], among others. At the foundations of
these nascent disciplines is a shared toolkit of statistical natural language
processing [@manning_foundations_1999; @jurafsky_speech_2008], automatic
summarization [@radev_centroid-based_2004; @nenkova_pyramid_2007], machine
learning [@rasmussen_gaussian_2006; @flach_machine_2012], network analysis
[@opsahl_node_2010; @szell_measuring_2010; @takhteyev_geography_2012], and
topic modeling [@wallach_topic_2006; @blei_probabilistic_2012].

Where distant reading perceives patterns across large-scale corpora,
microanalysis breaks literary systems down to their minute constituent
components.

![Micro, macro, and close reading.](images/micro.png)

Where distant reading and macroanalysis constitute the study of mediation
between readers and text aggregates (like canons, corpora, collections,
libraries, archives, and database) microanalysis examines mediation at the
level of physical minutiae otherwise not readily observed in cursory
exploration. The instruments of microanalysis may coincide with computational
tools, designed to find hidden patterns lurking above or beneath a given
document.[^ln2-iarkho] The micro-instrumentation might also include a
screwdriver, a binding needle, or a soldering iron: sharp tools that help to
pry open and to scrutinize otherwise magical textual black boxes.

Extant models of literary transmission assume movement through passive and
immutable media. Paper offers the document of record, which, once archived,
does not change its contents. By using analytic techniques like genetic
criticism and forensic reading, it is therefore possible to reconstruct if not
"authorial intent," then at least a trace of the author's hand. In some
contexts, we may even ascribe properties like "fidelity" to "original" works
of art. When media are immutable, we imagine a sort of a causal custody chain
between works and their creators, which at some point of creation occupy the
same contiguous space and time. Mechanical reproduction of print has
introduced a range of devices that mediate between the author and the reader.
Distance, time, and mediation subsequently weaken facile notions of authorial
fidelity or intent. At the very least, we know that editorial practices,
publishing markets, and communication technologies introduce an unintended
element of noise into the channel. But we have yet to understand the impact of
the computed, dynamic inscription. Unlike pen and paper which come in direct
contact with each other, the contact between keyboard and screen is
fundamentally a simulated, programmed experience. At its worst, the connection
suffers from intractable "man-in-the-middle" attacks, by which a third party
maliciously alters the content of communication [@needham_using_1978].

Changing material conditions of textual transmission push against familiar
literary critical ideas. For example, as the mechanical reproduction of print
weakens the material basis for authorship attribution, the notion of
authorship itself undergoes change. That is not say that the author is dead,
as Barthes would have it. Authors continue to live and to collect royalties
from the sale of their works. The weakening of the authorship function merely
makes certain ways of talking about things like "authorial intent" and
"fidelity to the original" difficult to sustain. Massively collaborative
writing projects like Wikipedia and procedural narrative generation (machine
writing) further erode ideas of authorial production based on individual human
agency. Yet, it would be a mistake to believe that the myth of autopoiesis
(the literature that "writes itself," writing that writes, discourse that
speaks, etc.)[^ln2-varela] can displace the myth of the author. A discipline
of close attention to the atomic particulars of encoding, transmission,
storage, and the decoding of text at the site if its application to the human
condition ultimately aims to reclaim subjective agency, in motion. This may
seem strange at first: to recover the subject in the physical minutiae of the
literary--technological encounter. Yet the point of contact is crucial, for it
is here that the subject seems to disappear, in a compressed moment of time
that needs to be unpacked with some precision.

## Copy

The division of text into form and content makes a difference in more
utilitarian ways as well. For example, imagine the challenge of compiling all
known commentaries on Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, by hand or programmatically. The
problem of what edition to use as the "base" for such a project presents itself
immediately. In the words of Barbara Mowat and Paul Werstine, the editors of
*Folger Digital Texts*, "readers assume that there is a single text for the
plays: what Shakespeare wrote. But Shakespeare's plays were not published the
way modern novels or plays are today: as a single, authoritative text. In some
cases, the plays have come down to us in multiple published versions,
represented by various Quartos (Qq) and by the great collection put together by
his colleagues in 1623, called the First Folio (F). There are, for example,
three very different versions of *Hamlet*, two of *King Lear*, *Henry V*,
*Romeo and Juliet*, and others. Editors choose which version to use as their
base text, and then amend that text with words, lines or speech prefixes from
the other versions that, in their judgment, make for a better or more accurate
text" [@mowat_textual_2012]. In other words, where the readers expect to
encounter *Hamlet* as a single, unified idea, they instead encounter a
multiplicity of slightly diverging textual "witnesses." Errors in transcription
and editorial interventions accumulate. The proliferation of unlicensed copies,
translations, and imitations further adds to the complexity of the problem.

Editors of classical literature will often solve the problem of diverging
copies by designating one version as canonical, preserving the formal
characteristics of the given version down to individual line breaks, as is
often done with Platonic dialogs. It then becomes possible to collate
commentaries, connecting each to individual words and passages at their
canonical location. The problem remains in the abstract: which version to count
as canonical? The act of deciding on what constitutes an authoritative edition
can quickly become a contentious issue, particularly when the text in question
carries religious or political significance.

A whole field of textual criticism exists in the service of negotiating
"critical" editions which in some way preserve the struggle to reconstruct a
measure of authority. But what should count for being authoritative? A number
of logical possibilities find as many ardent adherents. For some, the act of
deriving the authoritative text lies in reconstructing authorial intent, using
the author's notes, for example, or from first-hand witness testimony. Others
place a premium on reconstructing and analyzing the writing process itself, in
what has been dubbed as "genetic criticism" [@deppman_genetic_2004, 1-36]. Yet
another approach will compare multiple editions of the same text to derive a
possible meta-text, preserving all extant variations. Yet others will simply
rely on their judgment to produce what they believe is a "true" text based on a
number of personal and eclectic considerations [@bowers_rationale_1950,
@bowers_shakespeares_1954, @mcgann_radiant_2001]. Such approaches to textual
criticism have at least this one thing in common: behind the fuzzy profusion of
textual material they perceive the outlines of a single, unified work. As G.
Thomas Tanselle (a prominent textual scholar) puts it, "one must be able to
distinguish the work itself from attempts to reproduce it."[^ln11-tanselle] For
a textual critic of his kind, all real-word variants and reproductions are
suspect because possibly corrupt in some way. Despite its careful attention to
the materiality of the text as artifact, textual criticism in this vein remains
a classically idealistic pursuit. The work exists as an ideal form in the realm
of the ideal.

[ln11-tanselle]:  "Whatever concept of authorship one subscribes to, the act of
reading or listening to receive a message from the past entails the effort to
discover, through the text (or texts) one is presented with, the work that lies
behind" [@tanselle_rationale_2010, 13-18.].

Restoration and Anti-restoration. Eugene-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc (for) and
William Morris and John Ruskin (against). Also Teoria del restaruo by Brandi.

"To restore an edifice means neither to maintain it, nor to repair it, not to
rebuild it; it means to reestablish it in a finished state, which may in fact
never have actually existed at any given time." [@price_historical_1996, 314;
orig from @viollet-le-duc_foundations_1990, 195]

"It is for all these buildings, threfore, of all times and styles, that we
plead, and call upon those who hve to deal with them to put Protection in the
place of Restoration, to stave off decay by daily care, to prop a perilous wall
or mend a leaky roof by such means as are obvioiusly mant for support or
convering, and show no pretence of other art, and othrwise to resist all
tampering with either the favric or ornament of the buildings as it stands; if
it has become 

But whose who make the change wrout in our day under the name of Restoration,
while professing to bring back a building to the best time of its hisory, have
no guide but each his own individual whim to point out to them what i s
admirable and what contemptible; while the very nature o their task compels
them to destroy something and to supply the gap by imagining what the earlier
builders should or might have done." Data munging. Irreversible changes.
@price_historical_1996, 320; orig in "William Morris, "The Principles of the
Society as Set Forth Upon its Foundation," Builder 35 August 1877.

Ruskin lamp of memory.

"It is impossible, as impossible as to raise the dead, to restore anything that
has every been great or beautiful in architecture [...] That spirit which is
given only by the hand and eye of the workman, never can be recalled. Another
spirit may be given by another time, an it is then a new building; but the
spirit of the dead workman cannot be summoned up, and commanded to direct other
hands, and other thoughts. And as for direct and simple copying, it is palpably
impossible. What copying can there be of surfaces that have been worn half an
inch down [@staniforth_historical_2013, 2]?"

"But it is said there may come a necessity for restoration! Granted. Look the
necessity full in the face and understand it on its own terms. It is a
necessity for destruction. Accept it as such, pull the building down, throw its
stones into neglected corners, make ballast of them, or mortar, if you will'
but do it honestly, and do not set up a Lie in its
place"[@staniforth_historical_2013, 3].

On the Restoration of The Circumcision by Signorelli. "At Volterra, over the
alter of a Company in the Church of S. Francesco, he painted in fresco the
Circumcision of Our Lord, which in considered beautiful to a marvel, although
the Infant, having been injured by damp, was restored by Sodoma and made much
less beautiful than before. And, in truth, it would be sometimes better to
leave works half spoilt, when they have been made by men of excellence, rather
than to have them retouched by inferior masters." 1550 Tim's Vermeer.

picture cleaning as removing as removal of "varnishes and other encrustations,
by which a paininting may be obscured, but by which it is usulaly also in some
measur protected from injury." [@bomford_issues_2004, 60] Original in the
Report from the Select Committee on the National Gallery, London 1853, vi-xi.

Colliveau set about [restoring]this picture with uncommon solenity, because it was his
own. He began with the most delicate pumice stone, and very soon got into the
walls of th building, but was astonished to find the apearance of bricks and
mortar still, although not guite soneat; he soon cleared away the wall on
discovering a room beyond, and pictures, furniture, &c. most beautiful.
Gracious powers! how was he agitated; forgetting totally the mischief he was
commiting, his elbow went like a fiddler's; every thing vanished.---However,
finding a bed, the curtains of which (a dark green) were drawn close, he went
to work upon it ver tenderly; presently a pot de chambre came  in sight!---His
whole souldwas absorbed; his face all one ghastly grin; his legs (like German
flutes) tottered under him. Not that great philosopher Guffin Ragba, was more
agitated while cutting the leather from off his bellow, to disover how wind was
make, than was Monsieru Collifeau while scroring off the bed cloaths; at last
he found a lady asleep, very beautiful, because very fat, and a Dutch woman.
Now this part I did not see, and I believe but very few besides himself; but
alas! hew was soon to be at the end of his discoveries. Having got a glimpse of
some gilding, he redoubled his efforts, when he found it was an inscription; it
was in Dutch, and nearly thus, as translated by Mr. Peter La Cave:---"Now
caitiff, meditate on th havoc though hast made throughout thy lie, and go thang
thyself. In this picture, wretch! though have destroyed, what to the end of the
world, can never be replaced." [@bomford_issues_2004, 44-45]. Originally from
Julio Caesar Ibbetson, An Accidence, or Gamut, of Painting in Oil and water
Colous . London: Darton and Harvey, 1803, 5-14.

"The sculptor wastes away th rudo block til he has accomplished the desired
form. not so the painter. he builds up his forms from a blank surface, and
hides, as he rogresses all the preliminary layers upon which the etxternal
colours depend for durability and lustre. And hence, not on the meaning and
spririt of the work must be understood; the restorer must also be familiar with
he naure of the materials and the manner of their employment.
[@bomford_issues_2004, 70]. Original from @merritt_dirt_1854, 67-72


The wound
that heals.

Just giving you a taste of restoration vs. preservation. What would


[^ln11-counter]: A documentary on counterfeit goods produced by BBC4
interviews Christophe Zimmerman, Senior Technical Officer at World Customs
Organization, who deplores the industry's lack of cooperation with law
enforcement [@bbc4_counterfeiting_2013].


We have now traveled from the pixel down to magnetic storage media and back
from the storage media to the screen. The passage opens up space between
visible content, media, and the imposed forms that govern any and all higher
notions of literary activity "floating" above this nominally "digital" layer.
Technology does not determine the literary space: it has only the potential to
hide implicit mechanisms of machine control, or, to offer possibilities for
transformation not otherwise available to other forms of textuality. Loosely
coupled to its material contexts, text can continue its relentless drive from
matter to idea and into other matters as long as its passage is not hampered by
regimes that prohibit further sharing, remixing, and transmediation. I say nothing
yet of the potential necessity of such regulation. Under certain conditions, in
the name of privacy, security, or property rights, it may become necessary to
flatten out and to treat text as more of an analog, media-bound modality of
communication, limited in its ability to move across minds and cultures. But,
it is also in our broadly human, civic interest to keep such mechanisms of
constraint visible to view, under continual scrutiny of critical, close, and
closest possible reading.

## Gerard Genette and Nelson Goodman on the nature of textual copies,

## "reading" from the perspective of a copy machine

I want to foreshadow now what
will become the punchline of the whole book: namely that the ghost in the
machine cannot be reduced to some vague notions of value---these amount to a
distraction, which lies plainly upon the surface. The conspicuous ghostly
apparition (indicating the absence of a living subject) is agency itself,
which, for now, necrotically attaches itself to dead things like systems,
mediums, and automated discourses. If all this talk of value, ghosts, and
necromancy sounds familiar, the reader will not be surprised when I advance
Karl Marx as a preeminent theorist of the algorithm and someone able to help us
reason through Kittler's computational conundrum. On towards Marx then (who
will appear much later), through the machine that, although intimately familiar
to every writer and consumer of text by touch, remains alien and alienating in
its hidden possibilities, soothing and threatening all at once.  


When viewed in the context of book history, the universal Turing machine
signifies a consummation of several broad, long-term trends that begin with the
invention of writing itself.  The material history of literary
computing begins with petrified words that endure forever, and ends with word
as an electrical charge: animated, radiant, fluid, and iridescent
[@mcgann_radiant_2001; @bryant_fluid_2002].
Device. Splits All type is moveable type. At the same tim

which "sees" pages
as monolithic images. 

We often think of literary works as completed products. *To the Lighthouse,*
*Hamlet,* *Moby Dick* seem to circulate as complete, fixed entities. Textual
critics, in charge of creating a work out of a multiplicity of texts, remind us
that the work is a carefully-crafted illusion. The text multiplies, always
threatening to undermine the unity of the work. Think of something substantial
you have written recently: a paper or a proposal perhaps.

"Computer assisted tracing of text evolution"

Goodman's "Art and Authenticity." Benjamin. Immanence and transcendence.
Goodman: thinking about the perfect copy. But there is a confusion here: fake
art is not necessarily about a copy, it is about provenance. Autographic vs.
allographic art. Whether forgery is possible. Digital vs. analog art. Analog
art is medium bound. Digital abstracts from the material.

Duplicates in Computer Science. Almost 30% of webpages are "very similar to
other pages" [@fetterly_evolution_2003].

It is a commonplace sentiment now that the printing press brought with it the
Protestant Reformation [@dittmar_information_2011, @febvre_coming_2010,
@mcluhan_gutenberg_1962, @eisenberg_word_1992]. Movable type is responsible for
at least a part of that story. The mechanization of print is what turned
writing from an autographic into a supremely allographic art. The Gutenberg
press helped place a copy of the bible into the hands of every ordinary
believer. That meant also minimizing the role of the priest as a privileged
interpreter. Without books in hand Martin Luther could not have written "all
who are in the church are priests" [@hillerbrand_protestant_2009]. Movable type
lifted text from rarefied media of parchment into that of the reified and
disposable leaflet. But until well into the middle of the 20th century, the
printing press remained in the realm of big technology: expensive, centralized,
unwieldy, and relatively easy to suppress. The liberatory potential of media
independence comes into its full fruition after the age of the typewriter.
After a historically brief flowering in the wild, our daily textual practice is
once again in danger of returning to controlled, media-bound, and
tightly-regulated conditions of existence.

Several important developments in the twentieth century aided in the liberation
of text from its material contexts. The first is the copy machine.  It is an
entirely unglamorous job to ponder the phenomenology of reading from the point
of view of a photocopier. Yet the impact of the humble Ditto and Xerox machines
has only recently began to get the scholarly attention it deserves. In the
United States, the copy machine placed a smaller version of Gutenberg press
into every office. And it allowed for the flourishing of a vibrant samizdat
(self-publishing) scene, usually connected to underground culture movements
without access to conventional publishing: punks, skinheads, computer- and
game- geeks, feminists, fans of science fiction and queer-core music
[@klanten_behind_2011, @piepmeier_girl_2009, @duncombe_notes_2008].

The word "xerox" firmly entered the English lexicon by the
mid-1960s[^ln11-xerox] along with stencil duplicators, mimeograph machines,
microfiche, spirit duplicators,[^ln11-spirit] hectographs, and dot-matrix
printing. A whole industry of photocopying still exists to seamlessly peel the
content away from one material medium and plaster it into another.

From the "point of view" of a photocopier, the text exists only as pure form.
The electro-photographic process at the basis of modern photocopying (invented
in the 1930s, but with patents dating back to the middle of the 19th century)
describes documents in terms of "electric charge patterns," "photoemissive
layers," and "sheet surfaces"  [@carlson_electron_1940,
@carlson_electrophotography_1942, @carlson_graphic_1953]. The photocopier is a
device for total graphesis and extreme surface reading.[^ln11-ooo]. There is no
word or content for the photocopier: only paper and image. The photocopier's
"job", if you will, is to lift a picture from one page and to impress it into
another. It does so by temporarily imaging text (as picture) onto a
photo-sensitive drum. Ink powder sticks to the electrically charged surfaces of
the drum in correspondence to the shapes on the page. The shapes are then
rolled onto a new page, re-inscribing the image into the new medium. The text
is never immaterial. But for a moment it finds shape as an invisible electric
charge. The transformation should not be reduced to some sort of mystical,
metaphysical moment. On the contrary, in instrumental terms we observe the
relatively mundane process of media independence.

Let's linger on that moment of remediation. The process of textual
transcription by hand involves a similar transformation. When a scribe copies a
page from the bible, for example, he also "lifts" content from paper.  Not
unlike a photocopier, the human stores text in the electro-chemical pathways of
the brain, before reproducing it once again into another medium. And like a
photocopier, the human can perform the copy function mechanically, without
comprehension and on a purely formal, visual level. In fact, the historical
record is full of errors that suggest that pre-modern scribes wrote at widely
varying levels of literacy [@goudsmit_illiterate_1974,
@bucking_training_2007].[^ln11-literacy] In the Muslim tradition, the prophet
Muhammad himself is sometimes called "the unlettered prophet," to emphasize
fidelity and lack of mediation in the transcription of the message
[@calder_ummi_1990, @gunther_muhammad_2002, 1-26]. In other words, the Qur'an
claim to authenticity relies on the prophet's ability to copy the message
"verbatim." On the conservative Muslim view, anything but a faithful
transcription of the original text amounts to an interpretation, not
self-identical to the letter of the text (a translation, for example)
[@tibawi_is_1962, @fatani_translation_2005, @wilson_first_2009].[^ln11-quran]

Where the photocopier placed a printing press into every office, the printer
placed one on every desk. Falling cost of print.

Finally, the text exists on the screen and magnetic media only, where the cost
of reproduction approaches zero.

## Authorship function

The telegraph further weakens the
authorial function in transposing writing from its immediate physical
environment across vast geographical distances. The advent of telecommunication
lengthens the chain of technological mediation between author and reader. In
the absence of the identifying "hand," the telegraph clerk's and the censor's
mark cannot be distinguished from the author's (a common literary plot device
in the fiction of the period). The notion of a telegram's "fidelity" therefore
becomes an attribute of the communication channel as a whole (instead of an
attribute attached to authorial intent).

## the crisis of authenticity

It is quite odd, if you think about it, to believe that objects somehow retain
an aura or a trace of their history: "a handkerchief used by Princess Diana,"
or "the cigar box owned by President Kennedy." In some real sense, the
historical patina covering these objects is only imagined. President Kennedy's
fingerprints and the tears of Princess Diana have long disappeared from their
physical medium. Their trace cannot be reduced to "mere" physical
characteristics: that is, to actual scratches, stains, or molecules,
recoverable from the object. Rather, the object had to "be there" in some way,
acquiring a patina of authenticity. "Having been there" is what gives the
object value, sentimental or otherwise, in a condition that refuses formal
reduction to a set of merely material properties. The high price contemporary
society places on authentic artifacts is therefore a type of magical thinking.
Walter Benjamin's famous essay on the work of art in the age of mechanical
reproduction appears to both celebrate and lament the demise of such magic.
"The technique of reproduction detaches the reproduced object from the domain
of tradition," wrote Benjamin. "By making many reproductions it substitutes a
plurality of copies for a unique existence. And in permitting the reproduction
to meet the beholder or listener in his own particular situation, it
reactivates the object reproduced. These two processes lead to a tremendous
shattering of tradition which is the obverse of the contemporary crisis and
renewal of mankind" [@benjamin_work_1969, 217-253]. And yet, for Benjamin, the
easy reproducibility of modern art forms like film and photography also
"emancipates the work of art from its parasitical dependence on ritual"
[@benjamin_work_1969, 217-253]. One could read Benjamin's famous essay as a
piece of technological nostalgia, or as an expose on the magic and superstition
latent in modernist art. Crisis or emancipation? Benjamin feels both, and in
doing so he captures the metaphysical anxiety of the modern age. We desire for
our Vermeers to stay special but also for a Vermeer to hang in every home,
peering back at us from a multitude of anonymous reproductions.

The modern world faces the challenge of authenticity, which we have only began
to assimilate: politically, economically, and philosophically. The ubiquitous
holographic certificate of authenticity on a luxury handbag or on a "Digital
Versatile Disk" (how antiquated the DVD sounds already!) is a cheap band-aid
hiding the immaterial nature of these artifacts. Fashion and software companies
are reluctant to talk publicly about piracy,[^ln11-counter] because the so
called "knock-offs" are essentially exact duplicates, often "leaked" from the
very same factories producing the original.

Note that it makes no sense to talk about "what was meant" by the designer of
the handbag, the way textual critic may talk about authorial intention. Nor
would it make sense to "correct" some perceived flaw in the painting by
Vermeer. The practice parallel to "textual criticism" in visual arts is
restoration. Although similar to textual criticism in its aims to recover some
notion of the original, crucially, the practice of art restoration takes place
without reproduction. Unlike a critical volume, which essentially reprints the
work in its reconstructed entirety, restoration happens at the site. All
"unauthorized" copies constitute a forgery that competes for attention with the
original. One could say that for painting and handbags "matter is synonymous
with meaning," but the sentiment strains at the limits of critical vocabulary
in the tradition that gives us only the binaries of form and content.

The context-dependence of an artifact is not even medium-specific, as
Goodman would suggest. Texts are more allographic than handbags and paintings,
but Vermeers and Louis Vuitton purses are also in some sense perfectly
reproducible, like texts. They are texts, and I do not mean it in some
post-structuralist notion of "everything is a text."[^ln11-derrida]

Technologies like 3D scanning and printing increasingly reduce physical objects
to their textual representation, as is the case with the stereo lithographic
document (STL) format that describes objects for 3D printing.  Here, for
example, I reproduce code that describes "a surface" of a functional gun (the
code made available online by *Defense Distributed*, a self-described civic
liberty activist group):

```
22=(
BOUNDED_SURFACE()
B_SPLINE_SURFACE(1,2,((#34104,#34105,#34106),(#34107,#34108,#34109)),
 .UNSPECIFIED.,.F.,.F.,.F.)
B_SPLINE_SURFACE_WITH_KNOTS((2,2),(3,3),(15.1641909236141,15.3257778193699),
(2.99329024107099,3.14159265358979),.UNSPECIFIED.)
GEOMETRIC_REPRESENTATION_ITEM()
RATIONAL_B_SPLINE_SURFACE(((1.,0.997252058758362,1.),(1.,0.997252058758362,
1.)))
REPRESENTATION_ITEM('')
SURFACE()
);
```

This piece of code exists in its Platonic ideal *before* the physical artifact.
As costs of reproduction approach zero, so does the line between an object and
its description. Imagine a world where to think "gun" is also to seamlessly
bring one into existence. The erosion of boundaries between object and idea has
a pronounced effect on the governance of goods, felt precisely at the
distinction between the autographic and the allographic. Governments currently
regulate the manufacture and the distribution of guns as artifacts, but how
does one regulate guns as texts and ideas? Any such effort amounts to
censorship. What was first regulated under the regime of property law, now
increasingly falls under the regimes of intellectual property and rights to
speech. Where does that leave the practice of textual criticism? In such a
world there can be no distinction between works and texts. Unlike millions of
reproduced Vermeers (which no doubt occupy this world in the form of postcards,
posters, and photographs), text is text. It lies before us in glorious
flatness, as thick as a sheet of paper.

Text as I have already began to define it Chapter One, is a digital mode of
representation, defined, at least in part, by a relative lack of "stickiness"
to its physical medium. Textual artifacts therefore exhibit the dualism between
text and work to a much greater extent than other forms of art and
communication. A Vermeer is always a work. Not so with *Hamlet*. "Hamlet" may
indicate a category of relate, or, an individual instance of a given work.
Philosophers Nelson Goodman and Catherine Elgin explain this peculiarity by
making the distinction between "works of art whose identity depends on their
history of production" and works whose identity does not. The former they call
"autographic" and the latter "allographic" [@goodman_reconceptions_1988, 65].
These terms will be useful for us throughout the book. Architecture and
painting, in this view, are strongly autographic disciplines. An exact copy of
a Vermeer or of a building by Frank Lloyd Wright could never rise to the status
of the original. The originals have what Walter Benjamin called an "aura or
authenticity." No amount of precision, down to the molecular level, could
substitute for the historical patina of the original artifact.

### 5.4 Problem of Drafts

Text as vector. Barthes: text as "an organism which grows by vital
expansion"[@barthes_work_1978, 161].  "The metaphor of the Text is that of the
*network*" [@barthes_work_1978, 161].

Internet is not rhyzomatic. Mediation is at stake. " But the bottom line is
that dumb-pipe email is unmediated, and therefore it's a business that Google
wants to get out of as soon as it can."

" It's also why I believe Google will kill Gmail as soon as it comes up with a
mediated alternative everyone loves. Of course, Google may offer an antiquated
"Gmail view" as a semi-obscure alternative to the default "Inbox"-like mediated
experience."

Problem of Drafts and Versions Documents as vectors. Not completed things.
Files as cognitive scaffolding for collective memory. Vissman.

Science lecture vs. humanities. Stuff that is known. Stuff that is not known

What does it really mean to "know" something? Or to have "read" a book? I have
had the following conversation countless times. Someone asks, "Have you read
Nabokov's *Pale Fire*," and I respond, "Yes I have." But there is a world of a
difference between reading it yesterday, last week, or ten years ago. The book
as an interface leaves an organic trace in the human mind---an imprint that
begins to fade as soon as it is created.

How much knowledge is there in the world? According to a recent paper published
in Science, 295 exabytes (or billion gigabytes).[@hilbert_info_2012;]

Whatever consciousness is, it is propelled forward on a thin edge of material
substratum. Reality exists only in the now, where the past is a memory and the
future only a possibility. Imagine whispering something to a friend. It does
not have to be very complicated, something like "I love you" or "I miss you."
The whisper dissipates as soon it is uttered. The percussion of the speaker's
breath creates temporary order: giving shape and pushing air molecules into
waves of pattern and form. That order begins dissipating as soon as it is
created. Within milliseconds, molecules return to their natural state of chaos.

To steel ourselves against entropy, we change the substratum from air to stone.
It's molecules are more stable. Etched in stone will be the same message. It
will last longer now. But it will also take longer to create. You will have to
carry around your tablet and chisel. The message etched in stone will outlive
the whisper and indeed will

Repercussion? How we preserve ourselves today affects the future. Appointment
with self.

Leroi-Gourhan, André.

The book as an interface between human and ?. We must see it in the context of
interfaces.

Wikipedia as a Turing complete language. The power of versioning. Text as a
vector. The problem of annotation. What are we annotating? Annotation solutions
force a platform. Is Hamlet a platonic object? A family of related objects?
Standard English editions in Europe.


related to the plummeting costs of digital
reproduction. The supposedly "dead" authors continue to draw checks from
copyrighted work. 


