# Conclusion: Human Grounds for Computation

## Space

The politics of inscription are not simply a matter for academic discussion.
In the time that it took me to finish this book, a coalition of US "data
dissidents" won a temporary exemption from the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act to allow them to modify their medical implants. It included Hugo Campos,
who wanted to access data collected by his Implantable Cardioverter
Defibrillator, and Ben West and Jay Radcliffe who fought for rights to modify
their implanted insulin pumps. Marie Moe, of Norway, similarly struggled to
rewrite her heart implant's software. "I want to know what code is running
inside of my body," she said. "Medical devices are black boxes," she
continued, "you can't look into them, there's no transparency, we don't know
how they work."[@mcgowan_i_2016; @sellars_petition_2014]

Legal scholars from Harvard's Berkman Center presented the coalition's
concerns before the United States Copyright Office, Library of Congress. "The
purpose of a medical device company's source code is to enable the function of
a medical device," they argued:

> researchers like the members of this Coalition use the code in order to
publish criticism on how safe, secure, and effective these products actually
are. The use therefore resembles that of a book critic quoting excerpts of a
book in her critique, a paradigm case of fair use [@sellars_petition_2014, 4].

In Pakistan, the American National Security agency-sponsored Skynet program
has placed people on the US-sanctioned "disposition matrix" or "kill list"
based on predictive analytics: social network analysis, cellular machine
learning, patterns of travel and telephone use. Automated tools with names
like SMARTTRACKER, SMARTCHART, and Cloud Travel Analytic select people for
target strikes by unmanned areal vehicles [@mcneal_targeted_2014;
@weber_keep_2016]. Our ability to interpret codes that kill on our behalf also
stems from our capacity to access them, read, understand, modify, and publish
criticism.

Readers everywhere are engaged in a *political* struggle to control and deploy
codified resources. The heart and the sky are sites on which the tactics of
inscription are increasingly contested. They require a capacity to "meet the
machine" and a poetics capable of new emendations.

A media archaeology of digital inscription recovers the stratified depths
extant in all meaning-bearing literary devices. Files deep within an implant
or on a military command-and-control server, recapitulate the history of
laminate semiotics. Even print, which seems to escape computational
complexity, can fracture at the point of origin. Most contemporary texts still
voyage from keyboard to screen and electromagnetic storage, where they
diffuse, multiply, and resist comprehension. The screen subsequently simulates
extinct interpretive affordances. The reader turns a non-page, for there are
no pages on the planes of liquid crystal, floating gate, quantum tunneling,
and avalanche injection.

In its advanced form, the simulation usurps the simulated. The avatar
continues to mimic its object even as the object passes from use. "Scrolling
text," for example, has no basis in our experience of handling scrolls. The
page may go the same way. Readers who have never seen paper pages---recall the
viral image of a child trying to "swipe" a magazine cover---will cease to
identify it with a material unit of information. But like the scrolling of
scrolls, word processors and e-books will likely continue to simulate paper.
No longer connected to any recognized physics, reading will pass into the
realm of dead metaphor. Consider the possibility of interpretation as we know
it being a historical anomaly, connected to the contingencies of print.

The gap between input and output is what makes digital texts appear ephemeral.
Temporary storage media, located between keyboard and screen, allow for rapid
remediation. They keep ink in motion, across surfaces, unattached to "sticky"
media like paper. Such spatial elongation comes at a cost: the inscription
passes from view. The sign reappears again on screen, already "processed,"
that is, altered by the intervention of "control units." Reading no longer
identifies solitary, self-directed activity. Machine operators far removed
from the site of interpretation intervene between readers, writers, and texts.

The consequences of such persistent intervention are immense. Supplemental
"control characters," originally used for formatting, fuse with programming
languages capable of generalized "Turing complete" control and computation.
Technological and legal fictions rise to restore a measure of "stickiness" to
ephemeral text. Digital rights management circuits, for example, are routinely
embedded into video streaming devices to artificially limit the duplication of
broadcast material. Similarly, e-book sellers often prevent their readers from
copying and pasting content. Such measures mimic the constraints associated
with static, paper-and-ink-bound media regimes.

I began this book by noticing the duplicity of digital text, which splits its
energies between sites of storage and projection. The revealed complexity of
that state belies our alienation. Not since pre-modern times have we been so
removed from the material contexts of knowledge production. The average reader
today is privy only to surface phenomena. To meet the machine we must base our
strategies of interpretation on newly emergent computational realities.
Technologies that govern literacy cannot be allowed to develop apart from the
humanities. Such detachment threatens the legacy of interpretive practice,
enacted on page or pacemaker. Whatever their politics, literary scholars,
philosophers, and historians, must negotiate the tactics of reading alongside
law makers and software engineers. The right to access embedded
inscription---share, repair, remix, modify---underlies the possibility of
interpretation.

## Time

I am tempted to believe, like others before me, that I have enacted here
something akin to "systems phenomenology"---a glimpse into the assemblage of
people, texts, and technologies. In such cases, astute readers often reach for
Jakob von Uexküll's *A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans* to draw on
his notion of perceptual worlds [*umwelten*].[^ln3-umwelten] In his forays,
Uexküll saw our world from the perspectives of sea urchins, pea weevils, and
ichneumon wasps. The biologist's task, Uexküll believed, is to imagine such
alien life forms. The tick should not considered yet another rule-based
machine, Uexküll wrote, but a concious "operator" [@uexkull_foray_2010,
44-53]. Consequently, he insisted on the ultimate subjectivity of perceptual
experience. A tick projects its own sense of time and space onto the world,
which the biologist recovers in thick description of the animal's perceptual
apparatus.

Uexküll was also a pioneer of systems theory, advancing an organism-based
model of meaning making. An oak tree's canopy, he wrote, acts in unison with
rain to capture and distribute liquid down its roots. Capturing and
distributing liquid to the roots established, according his model, the
"meaning" of the oak--rain circuit. Meaning in that sense is a property of the
system, not the subject. It emerges from environmental interaction. A "circuit
of meaning" is thereby created between the organism and its surroundings.
Neither make sense in isolation. The subject and object are brought into
harmony:

> If the flower were not bee-like  
> If the bee were not flower-like  
> The harmony would never succeed [@uexkull_foray_2010, 198].

Post-humanism privileges moments of such alien subjectivity because they
destabilize an anthropocentric worldview. What gets lost in the shift of
perspectives is the apparent contradiction at the very core of what Dorion
Sagan has called the "Gaia sciences."[@uexkull_foray_2010, 12] An idea
ascendant in diverse fields from literary studies to information theory and
free-market economics shifts the capacity for meaning-making from subject to
assemblage and from individual to complex system. Meaning in that model is
always an aggregate: oak plus rain, bee plus flower. Consequently, it is never
available to the subject alone: oak, bee, or biologist. The quest for alien
semiotics leads to, in Uexküll's own words, "mute interaction" meaningful only
from some vantage point outside of the system [@uexkull_foray_2010, 148]. The
forest always "understands" more than the tree, the planet more than the
forest, and so on, in a regression that can only conclude with the one,
whole-universe monism. The quest to diminish human import paradoxically leads
to the most grandiose point of view possible.

In his essay on the subjective experience of bats, the philosopher Thomas
Nagel argued against such presumption. There must be something, he wrote,
about the experience of being a bat *for* a bat that remains inaccessible to
human description [@nagel_what_1974, 439]. To accept the complex systems
worldview is therefore to acknowledge the limits to human imagination. An
organ cannot speak for the organism. To encounter bats---dogs, trees, and
machines---for what they are, from the human perspective is, in that light, to
to retain a measure of the other's ineffable alienness.

There is a quiet humanism in Nagel's insistence on empirical phenomenology
[@nagel_what_1974, 449]. It would be wrong to confuse imagination for lived
experience, he argued. "Certainly it appears unlikely," Nagel wrote, "that we
will get closer to the real nature of human experience by leaving behind the
particularity of our human point of view and striving for a description in
terms accessible to beings that could not imagine what it was like to be us"
[@nagel_what_1974, 444]. "In discovering sound to be, in reality, wave
phenomenon," Nagel wrote, "in air or other media, we leave behind one
viewpoint to take up another." This gets us no closer to understanding the
common reality of the external world [@nagel_what_1974, 445-6].

A media history derived from Nagel's insight does not proceed in isolation
from the human condition: through pure technical description, for example. We
know technology only through based habitation, tied to our culture and
physiology. I therefore advance a descriptive history from the only
perspective available to me. As humanists struggle to theorize digital modes
of being, I find a need to reexamine the category of the human. No other point
of view can sustain analysis or critique. Post-human humanities are an
apparent contradiction. One can purport to speak neither for things nor
assemblages.

In refracting the technological other's gaze we see only ourselves. "Falsehood
and deception," Bakhtin wrote in a fragmentary contemplation of otherness,

> unavoidably peering out of their own correlation. The external image of
> thought, feeling, the external image of the soul. It is not I who looks out
> from the inside, but I look at myself with the eyes of the world, strange
> eyes; I am possessed by another. There is no integrity of internal and
> external here. To glimpse my own preocular image. The naïve confluence of
> self and the other in the mirror image. The surplus of the other. There is
> no point of view outside of myself; I cannot access my own internal image.
> From my eyes stare a stranger's eyes [@bakhtin_man_1997, 71].

An act of imagination accompanies analysis, but not in a way that exhausts
extrinsic perspective. The difficulty is one of retaining a surplus of the
other. To encounter one's own "pre-ocular" image is to inquire into the nature
of mediation.

I return, then, to the subject of time, continually in the background of this
book. The tick lies in wait for its next warm meal for decades (Uexküll
reports up to 18 years). Species time advances only by such remarkable events.
Where it seemed objective and universal, we now see it relative to the subject
and its environment [@uexkull_foray_2010, 52]. Popular reception of digital
technology belies a deep sense of anxiety about the pace it sets for our
existence. Throughout, one observes the delicate negotiation of synchronicity
between human and machine. A complex chain of transfiguration---encoding and
decoding---connects incongruent media---wetware and hardware. Homeostasis is
found at some arbitrary point, incidentally attached to human biology in a
state of technical augmentation. The resulting cyborg can either acquiesce to
contingent timelines or project its own. The question of "what constitutes a
moment," when watching television or reading a book, can finally be better
rephrased into what it *should* constitute.

Integrated crystal oscillators pace all forms of digital life: poetry, drone,
and heart implant. Against this rhythm, we advance a computational poetics,
the study of temporal arrangements: prosody, meter, enjambment, dissonance, and
syncopation.

## Parting Perspectives

A history of digital text undoubtedly reflects the legacy of European and
later North American colonialism. Treaties that negotiated early character
encodings initially did so in the dominant diplomatic languages, French and
English [@international_telegraph_union_documents_1865]. Even though modern
character encodings like the UTF-8 render many more international scripts, the
overall camber of digital literacy still skews towards English. Most
programming languages, for example, are its derivatives. Speaking it is a
requirement for professional practice. The challenge and consequence of the
book will be in exposing such technological bias.

It is easy to forget the blunt effectiveness of physical restraints to speech
in the global North-west. Books that are burned or redacted cannot be read at
all. Elsewhere, inequities of access to knowledge compel readers to print
their own books and build their own libraries. Witness the so-called "shadow
libraries" of Eastern Europe and Central Asia, the street book vendors of
India and Pakistan, and the gray market presses of Nigeria arising from the
country's "book famine"[@mahmood_copyright_2005; @okiy_photocopying_2005;
@liang_piracy_2009; @bodo_short_2014; @nkiko_book_2014; @_elsevier_2015]. More
than mere piracy, such *samizdat*-like practices preserve the literary sphere
[@tenen_book_2014]. Informal book exchange networks create reading publics
that own the means of textual production and dissemination. Under duress,
readers build homemade knowledge infrastructures: they duplicate, distribute,
catalog, and archive.

By contrast, in wealthier economies, such infrastructures are commodified.
Readers consequently receive the material contexts of their meaning-making
passively. The costs of knowledge production and barriers to its distribution
disappear from view. For many readers, technologies that support reading,
writing, and interpretation further pass from tools to fetishes. They are
swaddled in protective vestments and given a prominent place in the home. They
are imbued with animate spirits. We form emotional rather than intellectual
bonds with them, on aesthetic rather than ethical grounds. Thus we exist in a
state of profound alienation from mechanisms closest to our mental activity.

I look East and South, then, to see that whatever the technology, the choice
to wield an epistemic thing---word processor or character set---is never
neutral. Technology embodies power in non-obvious ways. One must thus insist
on dragging it into a dialectic, by which ideals are shown to reify into
specific technological commitments.

How do we, as a society, I want to ask in parting, escape the quietly
smothering embrace of technology? A multitude of microscopic prosthetics in
aggregate exert an enormous pressure on the mind's centers of pleasure and
satiation. A quietude descends on the dwellings of our intellectual life. The
digitally displaced hold on to the discomfort of the encounter with the
machine. Estrangement, always at the heart of immigrant or queer poetics,
reconciles without seeking wholeness or integration. I dedicate this book then
to queers and immigrants, literal and figurative---spatial, literary,
technological---to those being displaced unwillingly, to those exiled within
and without, to those who understand the need for self-displacement, to those
who transgress purposefully, and to those who continue to trespass.

[^ln3-umwelten]: See for example @agamben_open:_2003, 39-49; @hayles_print_2004,
16-17.
