# Chapter 6: Labor

Estrangement vs. alienation.

Finally, I would like to extend computational
formalism towards its speculative and as yet unrealized edge cases.

In conclusion, we will consider the possibility of literature without
language, discourse without structure, and art without representation.  ##
Copy

This property further had the effect of freeing digital representation from
its medium. A Rembrandt is bound to its canvas in a way that Shakespeare's
*Hamlet* is not.  Digital systems are media independent. *Hamlet* can be
reproduced on paper or stone, in Morse code, or bound in liquid crystal, and
still be *Hamlet* in some natural understanding of the work. 

The division of text into form and content makes a difference in more
utilitarian ways as well. For example, imagine the challenge of compiling all
known commentaries on Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, by hand or programmatically. The
problem of what edition to use as the "base" for such a project presents
itself immediately. In the words of Barbara Mowat and Paul Werstine, the
editors of *Folger Digital Texts*, "readers assume that there is a single text
for the plays: what Shakespeare wrote. But Shakespeare's plays were not
published the way modern novels or plays are today: as a single, authoritative
text. In some cases, the plays have come down to us in multiple published
versions, represented by various Quartos (Qq) and by the great collection put
together by his colleagues in 1623, called the First Folio (F). There are, for
example, three very different versions of *Hamlet*, two of *King Lear*, *Henry
V*, *Romeo and Juliet*, and others. Editors choose which version to use as
their base text, and then amend that text with words, lines or speech prefixes
from the other versions that, in their judgment, make for a better or more
accurate text" [@mowat_textual_2012]. In other words, where the readers expect
to encounter *Hamlet* as a single, unified idea, they instead encounter a
multiplicity of slightly diverging textual "witnesses." Errors in
transcription and editorial interventions accumulate. The proliferation of
unlicensed copies, translations, and imitations further adds to the complexity
of the problem.

Editors of classical literature will often solve the problem of diverging
copies by designating one version as canonical, preserving the formal
characteristics of the given version down to individual line breaks, as is
often done with Platonic dialogs. It then becomes possible to collate
commentaries, connecting each to individual words and passages at their
canonical location. The problem remains in the abstract: which version to
count as canonical? The act of deciding on what constitutes an authoritative
edition can quickly become a contentious issue, particularly when the text in
question carries religious or political significance.

A whole field of textual criticism exists in the service of negotiating
"critical" editions which in some way preserve the struggle to reconstruct a
measure of authority. But what should count for being authoritative? A number
of logical possibilities find as many ardent adherents. For some, the act of
deriving the authoritative text lies in reconstructing authorial intent, using
the author's notes, for example, or from first-hand witness testimony. Others
place a premium on reconstructing and analyzing the writing process itself, in
what has been dubbed as "genetic criticism" [@deppman_genetic_2004, 1-36]. Yet
another approach will compare multiple editions of the same text to derive a
possible meta-text, preserving all extant variations. Yet others will simply
rely on their judgment to produce what they believe is a "true" text based on
a number of personal and eclectic considerations [@bowers_rationale_1950,
@bowers_shakespeares_1954, @mcgann_radiant_2001]. Such approaches to textual
criticism have at least this one thing in common: behind the fuzzy profusion
of textual material they perceive the outlines of a single, unified work. As
G.  Thomas Tanselle (a prominent textual scholar) puts it, "one must be able
to distinguish the work itself from attempts to reproduce it."[^ln11-tanselle]
For a textual critic of his kind, all real-word variants and reproductions are
suspect because possibly corrupt in some way. Despite its careful attention to
the materiality of the text as artifact, textual criticism in this vein
remains a classically idealistic pursuit. The work exists as an ideal form in
the realm of the ideal.

[ln11-tanselle]:  "Whatever concept of authorship one subscribes to, the act
of reading or listening to receive a message from the past entails the effort
to discover, through the text (or texts) one is presented with, the work that
lies behind" [@tanselle_rationale_2010, 13-18.].

Restoration and Anti-restoration. Eugene-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc (for) and
William Morris and John Ruskin (against). Also Teoria del restaruo by Brandi.

"To restore an edifice means neither to maintain it, nor to repair it, not to
rebuild it; it means to reestablish it in a finished state, which may in fact
never have actually existed at any given time." [@price_historical_1996, 314;
orig from @viollet-le-duc_foundations_1990, 195]

"It is for all these buildings, threfore, of all times and styles, that we
plead, and call upon those who hve to deal with them to put Protection in the
place of Restoration, to stave off decay by daily care, to prop a perilous
wall or mend a leaky roof by such means as are obvioiusly mant for support or
convering, and show no pretence of other art, and othrwise to resist all
tampering with either the favric or ornament of the buildings as it stands; if
it has become 

But whose who make the change wrout in our day under the name of Restoration,
while professing to bring back a building to the best time of its hisory, have
no guide but each his own individual whim to point out to them what i s
admirable and what contemptible; while the very nature o their task compels
them to destroy something and to supply the gap by imagining what the earlier
builders should or might have done." Data munging. Irreversible changes.
@price_historical_1996, 320; orig in "William Morris, "The Principles of the
Society as Set Forth Upon its Foundation," Builder 35 August 1877.

Ruskin lamp of memory.

"It is impossible, as impossible as to raise the dead, to restore anything
that has every been great or beautiful in architecture [...] That spirit which
is given only by the hand and eye of the workman, never can be recalled.
Another spirit may be given by another time, an it is then a new building; but
the spirit of the dead workman cannot be summoned up, and commanded to direct
other hands, and other thoughts. And as for direct and simple copying, it is
palpably impossible. What copying can there be of surfaces that have been worn
half an inch down [@staniforth_historical_2013, 2]?"

"But it is said there may come a necessity for restoration! Granted. Look the
necessity full in the face and understand it on its own terms. It is a
necessity for destruction. Accept it as such, pull the building down, throw
its stones into neglected corners, make ballast of them, or mortar, if you
will' but do it honestly, and do not set up a Lie in its
place"[@staniforth_historical_2013, 3].

On the Restoration of The Circumcision by Signorelli. "At Volterra, over the
alter of a Company in the Church of S. Francesco, he painted in fresco the
Circumcision of Our Lord, which in considered beautiful to a marvel, although
the Infant, having been injured by damp, was restored by Sodoma and made much
less beautiful than before. And, in truth, it would be sometimes better to
leave works half spoilt, when they have been made by men of excellence, rather
than to have them retouched by inferior masters." 1550 Tim's Vermeer.

picture cleaning as removing as removal of "varnishes and other encrustations,
by which a paininting may be obscured, but by which it is usulaly also in some
measur protected from injury." [@bomford_issues_2004, 60] Original in the
Report from the Select Committee on the National Gallery, London 1853, vi-xi.

Colliveau set about [restoring]this picture with uncommon solenity, because it
was his own. He began with the most delicate pumice stone, and very soon got
into the walls of th building, but was astonished to find the apearance of
bricks and mortar still, although not guite soneat; he soon cleared away the
wall on discovering a room beyond, and pictures, furniture, &c. most
beautiful.  Gracious powers! how was he agitated; forgetting totally the
mischief he was commiting, his elbow went like a fiddler's; every thing
vanished.---However, finding a bed, the curtains of which (a dark green) were
drawn close, he went to work upon it ver tenderly; presently a pot de chambre
came  in sight!---His whole souldwas absorbed; his face all one ghastly grin;
his legs (like German flutes) tottered under him. Not that great philosopher
Guffin Ragba, was more agitated while cutting the leather from off his bellow,
to disover how wind was make, than was Monsieru Collifeau while scroring off
the bed cloaths; at last he found a lady asleep, very beautiful, because very
fat, and a Dutch woman.  Now this part I did not see, and I believe but very
few besides himself; but alas! hew was soon to be at the end of his
discoveries. Having got a glimpse of some gilding, he redoubled his efforts,
when he found it was an inscription; it was in Dutch, and nearly thus, as
translated by Mr. Peter La Cave:---"Now caitiff, meditate on th havoc though
hast made throughout thy lie, and go thang thyself. In this picture, wretch!
though have destroyed, what to the end of the world, can never be replaced."
[@bomford_issues_2004, 44-45]. Originally from Julio Caesar Ibbetson, An
Accidence, or Gamut, of Painting in Oil and water Colous . London: Darton and
Harvey, 1803, 5-14.

"The sculptor wastes away th rudo block til he has accomplished the desired
form. not so the painter. he builds up his forms from a blank surface, and
hides, as he rogresses all the preliminary layers upon which the etxternal
colours depend for durability and lustre. And hence, not on the meaning and
spririt of the work must be understood; the restorer must also be familiar
with he naure of the materials and the manner of their employment.
[@bomford_issues_2004, 70]. Original from @merritt_dirt_1854, 67-72


The wound that heals.

Just giving you a taste of restoration vs. preservation. What would


[^ln11-counter]: A documentary on counterfeit goods produced by BBC4
interviews Christophe Zimmerman, Senior Technical Officer at World Customs
Organization, who deplores the industry's lack of cooperation with law
enforcement [@bbc4_counterfeiting_2013].


## Gerard Genette and Nelson Goodman on the nature of textual copies,
## 2.5 Marx upside down

It is this last and still current moment of historical development that is
least theorized. A dominant tradition in the history of the human sciences
follows Louis Althusser and Michel Foucault (and, to a lesser extent, Jacques
Derrida)[^ln1-derr] in analyzing mechanisms of structure and control in terms
of ideology, discourse, and representation. Where for Althusser "every science
is a science of ideology,"[^ln1-alt] Foucault posits his archeology of the
human sciences on the level of "positive unconscious," revealing unspoken
"rules" that govern the formation of "theories, concepts, and objects of study"
on the level of "scientific representation" [@foucault_order_1994, xi].

There are a number of theoretical niceties here (that the reader may skip, if
not interested in the history of Marxist thought). For example, the concept of
ideology, in the orthodox Marxist schema of things, exists as a "political
superstructure [...] to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness." In the Marxist model, ideology floats *above* the material
base---the dominant mode of production---that "determines the general character
of the social, political and spiritual processes of life"
[@marx_contribution_1904, 11]. Althusser's influential contribution to this
world view was to insist that ideology, although secondary to the mode of
production, nevertheless assures its continual reproduction as a means of
continuing subjugation and political control. Simply put, for Althusser, the
ideological apparatus of the modern capitalist state ends up being "installed
in the dominant [social] position" [@althusser_lenin_2001, 85-127]. In a
similar (although not equivalent) rhetorical move, Foucault envisions that
beneath the "epistemological level" of human activity there exists an
"archaeological layer," where representation "governs the mode of being of
language, individuals, nature, and need itself" [@foucault_order_1994, 209].
Ideology and representation, once determined, now determine. The rhetorical
jujitsu inverts Hegel yet again, to put Marx back on his head.[^ln1-flip] My
short history of the universal Turing machine runs counter to this top-heavy
tradition of reading Marx in the inverse. As a device, the Turing machine fuses
control and communication. Control is meant here bluntly, as physical circuit
control, at the level of the mechanism and not at the attenuated level of
ideology or representation.


John Eberhard from the Institute of Applied Technology, National Bureau of
Standards speaking in 1967 at the Electronic Composition in Printing symposium
at Gaithersburg Laboratories.

@technology_electronic_1968, 1

I happen to be a humanist among the physical scientists here at the National
Bureau of Standards. Begins with a quote from Marshall McLuhan. "He who does
his work like a machine, grows a heart like a machine in his breast, and he who
carries a heart of the machine in his breast losses his simplicity. He who has
lost his simplicity, becomes unsure of the strivings of his soul."

"It is a long way from standards like the alphabet to standards like privacy
with the respect to the use of computers."

"We are concerned not only with nuts and bolts and screw threads or with the
standards related to the phenomena of matter and materials. We are becoming
increasingly concerned about man and about how man becomes a part of this
measuring system" [2].

Heidegger would be good here.

Media

## Quantity vs. Quality (microanalysis)

The reading of short stories, novels, poetry, and plays is at grave risk,
concluded the last survey of Public Participation in the Arts conducted by the
Census Bureau on the behest of the National Endowments for the Arts (NEA). 

> For the first time in modern history, less than half of the adult population
> now reads literature, and those trends reflect a larger decline in other
> sorts of reading. Anyone who loves literature, or values the cultural,
> intellectual, and political importance of active and engaged literacy
> [...] will respond to this report with grave concern" [@nea_reading_2004,
> vii]. 

Contrary to the report's findings, numbers about textuality at large tell a
different and an entirely more optimistic story.


In the 1990s, the ire of the metaphysically disaffected coursed against visual
culture and television [@stephens_rise_1998; @merrin_television_1999]. A decade
later it turned against the internet and computation, which to many threaten
the very foundations of humanity and the humanities [@golumbia_cultural_2009;
@fish_digital_2012; @marche_literature_2012].[^ln2-internet] My thesis,
presented here and throughout, is that the aims of such metaphysical angst are
misaligned. Reconstructing the physical conditions of textuality, the work
begun in the first chapter of the book, makes plain the profound alienation
from material contexts of literary production on the part of readers and
authors. Although literacy thrives, the very nature of what constitutes a
literary text changes with the advent of new material conditions. Changing
circumstances destabilize established modes of literary production, access, and
distribution tied to the circulation of paper and ink.

[^ln2-internet]: The NEA study has this to say on the topic of "What is
responsible for the decline of literary reading?": "If the 2002 data represent
a declining trend, it is tempting to suggest that fewer people are reading
literature and now prefer visual and audio entertainment. Again, the
data---both from SPPA and other sources---do not readily quantify this
explanation [...] the Internet, however, could have played a role. During the
time period when the literature participation rates declined, home Internet use
soared" [@nea_reading_2004, 30]. In his 2004 *Humanism and Democratic
Criticism*, Edward Said wrote about the "fundamental irreconcilability between
the aesthetic and the non-aesthetic," which must be sustained "as a necessary
condition of our work as humanists." The aesthetic exists in opposition to
"quotidian" experiences that we all share, writes Said: "To read Tolstoy,
Mahfouz, or Melville, to listen to Bach, Duke Ellington, or Elliott Carter, is
to do something different from reading the newspaper or listening to the taped
music you get while the phone company or your doctor puts you on hold." A
corollary to my main thesis is an argument against that commonly held belief
about the relationship between literature and aesthetics. To my mind, the
distinction is impossible to define, let alone maintain in practice. Bias in
favor of the aesthetic is bias in favor of a specific, historically  and
materially  contingent idea of the aesthetic. That preconceived idea carries
with it a hidden cost, introducing numerous blind spots into the study of
literature at large, limiting the critical task in scope and relevance. Textual
diffusion threatens not the humanity (or the humanities), but the existing
socioeconomic order that governs who gets to access, to interpret, and to
archive literature as text and document. I begin with several propositions
then: one that the literary field, understood in broad terms, is expanding, and
two, that with a quantitative expansion comes qualitative change in the
material makeup of the literary field. Where I start with a top-down,
theoretical reconceptualization of literature as an epistemological category, I
end with a bottom-up media history that traces the passage of pixel into text.

When surveying the introductory literature on literature, the reader will
invariably find a version of Said's "fundamental irreconcilability" position.
For example, in Austin Warren and Renee Wellek's *Theory of Literature* the
authors write that the "term 'literature' seems best if we limit it to the art
of literature, that is, to imaginative literature [...] the main distinctions
to be drawn are between the literary, the everyday, and the scientific uses of
language" [@wellek_theory_1949, 22]. Similarly, Raymond Williams defines it to
mean "mainly poems and plays and novels," as opposed to other kinds of
"serious" writing that are "general," "discursive," or "the sub-literary"
[@williams_keywords_1976, 152-153].[^ln2-engell] Sharing a bias in favor of
aesthetic reading with my colleagues, I would rather spend my free time reading
Kincaid or Coetzee than poring over arcane printer and telegraph manuals.
Implicit in that bias is an idea---professed by Immanuel Kant, Friedrich
Schiller, and, more recently, Tzvetan Todorov and Elaine Scarry---linked with
the belief in the connection between beauty and justice, beauty and the good,
beauty and the upright moral life. I wish to avoid disturbing the foundations
of that intellectual edifice, and only want to point out that, for some, beauty
can also reside outside of artful discourse, and that others find beauty in the
strangest of places, and that texts---their movement within and across
cultures---present many problems not exhausted by the ethic or the aesthetic
realms. Reading fiction (of a kind) for pleasure (of a kind) may indeed be a
vanishing pastime, but that is not to say that our society has gotten less
interested in literature of all kinds. On the contrary, whole new disciplines
have sprung up to deal with textual saturation: natural language processing,
narrative generation, automatic translation and summarization, computational
text analysis, discourse analysis, corpus linguistics, and digital humanities
among others.

Matters always central to the field of literary studies remain vitally
important to the functioning of modern society. Literary studies, when
conceived broadly, provide fertile grounds for collaboration between diverse
disciplines interested in the changing dynamics of narrative, interpretation,
language, form, prosody, composition, dialog, discourse, story, genre,
authorship, influence, and text. It is in this core conceptual cluster of
operational terms that I want to locate a notion of poetics, poetics capable of
addressing not only the machinations of poetry and prose, but also of pixel,
code, string, script, inscription, list, document, file, record, project, and
archive. Rather than picky epicureans of high lit, I imagine my fellow
travelers as voracious omnivores of text. My polemical aside in this chapter is
not meant to re-introduce, much less argue for a side in contentious binary
distinctions along which meta-commentary of this sort usually unfolds: science
vs. the humanities, close reading vs. distant reading. In conceiving a field of
activity to make space for this book, I cast my vote note for ether/or but for and.

This is not to say that I advocate ignorance, nor do I follow the Russian
formalist poet Vladimir Mayakovksy, who at the beginning of the last century
called on his peers to "cast Pushkin, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, et al. overboard
from the ship of Modernity." foobar citation I hold instead that in the
implicit perusal of the subjectively beautiful discourse literary scholars
have abandoned vast and fecund textual vistas. In privileging the aesthetic,
the study of Literature has tied its fate to that of an increasingly vanishing
pastime---the leisurely reading of poetry and fiction, of a specific kind,
holding a privileged form, sold in preferred manner.

Hampered by an artificially limited field of activity, the study of literature
so conceived excavates a small, sacred patch of ground at the tip of an immense
textual iceberg. The results of that strenuous activity sink to join the mass
of its submerged and excavated bottom. Texts multiply and produce other texts:
that's more or less the point of Roland Barthes's 250-page exegesis of a
30-page short story by Honoré de Balzac. Despite my fond appreciation of
Barthes as a scholar, I suspect that exponential growth and diminishing returns
will eventually make (if not already have made) such relentlessly exegetic mode
of scholarship unsustainable. There are, by my approximation, over 20,000
monographs on Balzac,[^ln2-balzac] and at least as many scholarly articles on
*S/Z*.[^ln2-barthes] The value of each new "Barthes" and his associated
commentary plummets as texts multiply exponentially, quickly reaching the
limits of human comprehension. There are no winners in such an arms race
between "primary texts" and footnotes: only eventual irrelevance.

[^ln2-balzac]: Search query `ti:Balzac` at OCLC Worldcat.
[^ln2-barthes]: Search query `Barthes AND Balzac` using Google Scholar.

Non-positivistic disciplines like literary studies lack a methodology for
definitively settling any research program. For this reason, where the sciences
usually defer to the "last word" on any given question, citation patterns in
the humanities journals indicate that the humanities privilege historically
established sources [@tenen_digital_2014]. Without robust mechanisms for
condensing and for pruning accepted knowledge, the archive expands
precipitously. Its combined weight necessarily devalues the literature of the
present, creating a curious kind of a gap in contemporary material. A
"modernist" in literary studies denotes a specialist who works on documents
which are now more than a century old. And most departments of literature cover
only a limited range of best-sellers from the post-WWII period. A competent
graduate literature student can likely name a dozen or so contemporaneous
literary movements emerging at the turn of the twentieth century. Few in the
field are likely to name more than a handful at the turn of the
twenty-first.[^ln2-survey]

The logic of Said's eloquent defense of the aesthetic merely continues a
tradition of exclusionary distinction-making, which, before Said, denied
writers like Naguib Mahfouz and musicians like Duke Ellington a place in the
curriculum. The logic of exclusion on aesthetic basis places the critic in the
awkward role of a taste-maker, limiting research to texts that in a sense were
already "blessed" by the establishment. Scholars working on "lesser" or
"unknown" texts and writers must expend considerable energy justifying the
aesthetic merits of their chosen subject. At stake in the binary logic of
aestheticism are the very notions of "beautiful" and "quotidian" as markers of
prestige---notions that encourage disciplinary infighting, tug-of-war style, by
which much energy is spent in struggling to pull material from one category
into the other. In the meantime, the shoring up of the aesthetic detracts from
the larger aims of literary scholarship, reducing literature to its ornamental
function, as a "neat illustration" for otherwise empirical accounts of the
human condition.[^ln2-menand]

[^ln2-menand]: I am echoing Louis Menand's "the version of the humanities that
would make many non-humanists most comfortable today is the version in which
art and literature are ornaments on or neat illustrations of empirical accounts
of human life" [@menand_dangers_2005, 10-17]. 

To limit the literary to a historically contingent ideal of the aesthetic is to
limit the project of literary analysis to a moralizing, prescriptive
enterprise. A whole tradition of Marxist criticism reminds readers that
prescription cannot be ideologically neutral. "Literature does not exist in the
sense that insects do," Terry Eagleton writes in his introduction to literary
theory. "Value judgments by which it is constituted are historically variable,"
he concludes, having "a close relation to social ideologies." For Eagleton,
values are more than the simple assertion of private taste. Instead, they refer
to assumptions "by which certain social groups exercise and maintain control
over others [@eagleton_criticism_1976, 15-47]." Who controls what? My
interpretation of Marxist materialism is considerably more literal than
Eagleton's. I am interested here in physical mechanisms of control, not only in
their more ephemeral ideological justifications.

In trying to reconcile the NEA's dour prognoses with broad theoretical models
and demographic trends that reflect a proliferation of textual material, I am
confronted with two possible explanations. The writers of the report hint at
the first themselves: treating the ebb of literary reading (in a particular
mode) as cause and symptom for the general decline of the arts (and perhaps of
civilization itself). I find that reading unacceptable, (a) because it is
depressing and (b) because it smacks of historical exceptionalism. I strongly
suspect that humanity's potential for innovation and creativity has remained
relatively stable throughout history. The literary ecosystem is as vibrant and
as diverse as ever. Material conditions for creative expression change (as in
times of political oppression, pestilence, or war), where the spirit endures.

The second, much more palatable (and likely) explanation would question the
very definitions of literary reading. Consider the possibility of online or
digital literature that evolves according to a logic of its own, where previous
ideas of "genre" or "literary movements" no longer apply. To restrict literary
reading to "novels, short stories, plays, and poetry" (as is done in the NEA
report) is to deny some measure of literariness to song-writing, computer
game-making, software design, and, in an obvious way, to non-fiction or, let's
say, to essays of arbitrary length. Imagine, for example, excluding reality
television from the survey on television habits, because the genre does not
conform to some normative sense of what television should be. Do the literary
survey-makers consider literature as a medium, like television, or a grab-bag
of "serious genres" like comedy and drama? As it turns out: both. The authors
concede the point in sometimes classifying readers by the number of books read
in any genre, effectively equating literature with "books" [@nea_reading_2004].
But even that concession confuses form with function. What if "reading a book"
begins to involve something other than moving one's eyes from left to right
over sequentially numbered blocks of text? Or what if books were more like
pills, or prosthetics, than parchment? The conundrum reveals a strong
methodological bias favoring historically contingent (and likely modernist)
conceptions of the literary. A report that initially looks like objective,
quantitative, descriptive analysis (that's the way things are) hides a
qualitative, proscriptive program (that's the way they should be).

[^ln2-engell]: See also @engell_teaching_1988.

Starting with the late 1960s, a generation of scholars (Northrup Frye, Murray
Krieger, and E. D. Hirsch, among others) took up the problem of value in
literary criticism in a concerted fashion. Their conversation splintered into
three camps: the separatists---those who viewed the production of value as a
detriment to the discipline; the inseparatists (to coin a term)---those who
believed that value creation is inseparable from the study of literature; and
the compatibilists, or those who attempted to integrate the two opposing
positions. Frye, for one, argued that value production should not be a part of
the scholar's task, because the concept of value itself is "individual,
unpredictable, variable, incommunicable, indemonstrable, and mainly an
intuitive reaction to knowledge." "The more consistently one conceives of
criticism as the pursuit of values," wrote Frye, "the more firmly one becomes
attached to that great sect of anti-intellectualism" [@frye_value_1968, 317].
Ever the dry wit, Frye wrote that one can pursue a sense of value no more than
one can pursue a sense of happiness. Values, like happiness, are not end-goals
in themselves, but rather "emotional reaction[s] to activity" and a "feeling
we get from pursuing something else" [@frye_value_1968, 311].

To this Murray Krieger responded by pointing out the inevitability of value
formation in the work of even the most analytically inclined critic. Krieger
writes: "The categories [of the literary, the poetic] define their subject and
erect value criteria for admission, so that for the work to attain the
definition is for it to qualify as a valued individual in a valued class. The
work comes to be discovered, defined, and valued as poetry only by way of a
preexisting generic characteristic which the critic began by adopting as his
perspective glass to envision it [foobar sense]." All this just to say that
even for scholars like Frye, the process of valuation happens before the
encounter with the text. In designating the poem as a poem, the critic already
has brought with her a set of preconceived notions that distinguish what
constitutes poetry, and what does not; who is in and who is out. From this
viewpoint, abjuring the task of explicit value formation borders on the
irresponsible.

Critics like E. D. Hirsch offered a compromise between these two positions,
arguing that although value-making contaminates all acts of interpretation, the
scholar can and should adopt an interrogatory stance towards value creation as
such, which ultimately allows her to "form new judgments of value and
significance" [@hirsch_literary_1968, 331]. In this camp we also find
"Contingencies of Value," by Barbara Herrnstein Smith, published in 1983. At
the time, Smith urged her peers to make the examination of social
value-creating mechanisms a part of their academic discipline. "What are
commonly taken to be *signs* of literary value, are also its *springs*," Smith
writes [@smith_contingencies_1983, 30]. And the springs unmistakably push the
whole enterprise towards the Western, economically privileged model of the
canon. Texts that persist in the teaching and the selling of literature survive
as long as they do not radically subvert the prevailing ideology. Smith stops
short of offering a way out. For even as the canon grows to include previously
excluded voices, those voices take on the shape of soft acquiescence. The
custodians of the Western canon "cannot grasp or acknowledge" that alternative
forms of literariness and textuality can take on the functions of Dante or
Homer for others [@hirsch_literary_1968, 1-35]. I am appropriately galvanized
by Smith's fiery rhetoric, but must admit that not much has changed since the
1980s. Her compromise simply does not approach the very peculiarity of the
question itself. Must we value the object of our study?

To understand the peculiarity of the question, try asking: Does an
anthropologist observing cock fighting, condone animal cruelty? Does a
historian writing about war, sanction violence? Does a philosopher working on
the problem of other minds, love solipsism? In each case, synonyms for
value-making---loving, sanctioning, condoning---appear out of place,
incongruent with the inquiry at hand. Something is rotten in the very
formulation of the query. To put it differently: Must we study *only* what we
value? I cannot think of a way to defend the answer to the affirmative. A
zoology that singularly insists on the study of beautiful animals is itself a
strange creature.[^ln2-zoo] A more radical compromise compels us to seek value
in the importance of the inquiry itself: in the quality of the questions
raised, and in the relevance of the answers given. If literary reading of a
certain kind has the power ascribed to it by the NEA report (increased civic
participation, etc.), literary humanities need not concern themselves with the
protection of the literary. The survival of the field depends on the freedom of
its cadres to pursue the literary function everywhere, indiscriminately. A more
neutral and broad consideration of literary domain can include and preserve all
extant forms of textuality.

[^ln2-zoo]: There are several studies that explore
the effect of perceived aesthetics on zoology and conservation. See esp.
@stokes_things_2007; @frynta_are_2009. The short of it: cute animals get more
funding.

I am trying to burrow (impatiently, because the archive is thick, and the
bedrock far) from a big idea, like literature, down to its more modest textual
forms, and into the material substratum underlying all print media---paper,
digital, or otherwise. For this, I will need an operational definition of
literature, free (to the extent it is possible) from its normative spectres:
something like "systemic application of textuality to human life," and
textuality as "the site of literary activity." But I am not yet ready to move
beyond the obvious tautology.

## "reading" from the perspective of a copy machine

I want to foreshadow now what
will become the punchline of the whole book: namely that the ghost in the
machine cannot be reduced to some vague notions of value---these amount to a
distraction, which lies plainly upon the surface. The conspicuous ghostly
apparition (indicating the absence of a living subject) is agency itself,
which, for now, necrotically attaches itself to dead things like systems,
mediums, and automated discourses. If all this talk of value, ghosts, and
necromancy sounds familiar, the reader will not be surprised when I advance
Karl Marx as a preeminent theorist of the algorithm and someone able to help us
reason through Kittler's computational conundrum. On towards Marx then (who
will appear much later), through the machine that, although intimately familiar
to every writer and consumer of text by touch, remains alien and alienating in
its hidden possibilities, soothing and threatening all at once.  

We often think of literary works as completed products. *To the Lighthouse,*
*Hamlet,* *Moby Dick* seem to circulate as complete, fixed entities. Textual
critics, in charge of creating a work out of a multiplicity of texts, remind us
that the work is a carefully-crafted illusion. The text multiplies, always
threatening to undermine the unity of the work. Think of something substantial
you have written recently: a paper or a proposal perhaps.

"Computer assisted tracing of text evolution"

Goodman's "Art and Authenticity." Benjamin. Immanence and transcendence.
Goodman: thinking about the perfect copy. But there is a confusion here: fake
art is not necessarily about a copy, it is about provenance. Autographic vs.
allographic art. Whether forgery is possible. Digital vs. analog art. Analog
art is medium bound. Digital abstracts from the material.

Duplicates in Computer Science. Almost 30% of webpages are "very similar to
other pages" [@fetterly_evolution_2003].

It is a commonplace sentiment now that the printing press brought with it the
Protestant Reformation [@dittmar_information_2011, @febvre_coming_2010,
@mcluhan_gutenberg_1962, @eisenberg_word_1992]. Movable type is responsible for
at least a part of that story. The mechanization of print is what turned
writing from an autographic into a supremely allographic art. The Gutenberg
press helped place a copy of the bible into the hands of every ordinary
believer. That meant also minimizing the role of the priest as a privileged
interpreter. Without books in hand Martin Luther could not have written "all
who are in the church are priests" [@hillerbrand_protestant_2009]. Movable type
lifted text from rarefied media of parchment into that of the reified and
disposable leaflet. But until well into the middle of the 20th century, the
printing press remained in the realm of big technology: expensive, centralized,
unwieldy, and relatively easy to suppress. The liberatory potential of media
independence comes into its full fruition after the age of the typewriter.
After a historically brief flowering in the wild, our daily textual practice is
once again in danger of returning to controlled, media-bound, and
tightly-regulated conditions of existence.

Several important developments in the twentieth century aided in the liberation
of text from its material contexts. The first is the copy machine.  It is an
entirely unglamorous job to ponder the phenomenology of reading from the point
of view of a photocopier. Yet the impact of the humble Ditto and Xerox machines
has only recently began to get the scholarly attention it deserves. In the
United States, the copy machine placed a smaller version of Gutenberg press
into every office. And it allowed for the flourishing of a vibrant samizdat
(self-publishing) scene, usually connected to underground culture movements
without access to conventional publishing: punks, skinheads, computer- and
game- geeks, feminists, fans of science fiction and queer-core music
[@klanten_behind_2011, @piepmeier_girl_2009, @duncombe_notes_2008].

The word "xerox" firmly entered the English lexicon by the
mid-1960s[^ln11-xerox] along with stencil duplicators, mimeograph machines,
microfiche, spirit duplicators,[^ln11-spirit] hectographs, and dot-matrix
printing. A whole industry of photocopying still exists to seamlessly peel the
content away from one material medium and plaster it into another.

From the "point of view" of a photocopier, the text exists only as pure form.
The electro-photographic process at the basis of modern photocopying (invented
in the 1930s, but with patents dating back to the middle of the 19th century)
describes documents in terms of "electric charge patterns," "photoemissive
layers," and "sheet surfaces"  [@carlson_electron_1940,
@carlson_electrophotography_1942, @carlson_graphic_1953]. The photocopier is a
device for total graphesis and extreme surface reading.[^ln11-ooo]. There is no
word or content for the photocopier: only paper and image. The photocopier's
"job", if you will, is to lift a picture from one page and to impress it into
another. It does so by temporarily imaging text (as picture) onto a
photo-sensitive drum. Ink powder sticks to the electrically charged surfaces of
the drum in correspondence to the shapes on the page. The shapes are then
rolled onto a new page, re-inscribing the image into the new medium. The text
is never immaterial. But for a moment it finds shape as an invisible electric
charge. The transformation should not be reduced to some sort of mystical,
metaphysical moment. On the contrary, in instrumental terms we observe the
relatively mundane process of media independence.

Let's linger on that moment of remediation. The process of textual
transcription by hand involves a similar transformation. When a scribe copies a
page from the bible, for example, he also "lifts" content from paper.  Not
unlike a photocopier, the human stores text in the electro-chemical pathways of
the brain, before reproducing it once again into another medium. And like a
photocopier, the human can perform the copy function mechanically, without
comprehension and on a purely formal, visual level. In fact, the historical
record is full of errors that suggest that pre-modern scribes wrote at widely
varying levels of literacy [@goudsmit_illiterate_1974,
@bucking_training_2007].[^ln11-literacy] In the Muslim tradition, the prophet
Muhammad himself is sometimes called "the unlettered prophet," to emphasize
fidelity and lack of mediation in the transcription of the message
[@calder_ummi_1990, @gunther_muhammad_2002, 1-26]. In other words, the Qur'an
claim to authenticity relies on the prophet's ability to copy the message
"verbatim." On the conservative Muslim view, anything but a faithful
transcription of the original text amounts to an interpretation, not
self-identical to the letter of the text (a translation, for example)
[@tibawi_is_1962, @fatani_translation_2005, @wilson_first_2009].[^ln11-quran]

Where the photocopier placed a printing press into every office, the printer
placed one on every desk. Falling cost of print.

Finally, the text exists on the screen and magnetic media only, where the cost
of reproduction approaches zero.

## Authorship function

The telegraph further weakens the
authorial function in transposing writing from its immediate physical
environment across vast geographical distances. The advent of telecommunication
lengthens the chain of technological mediation between author and reader. In
the absence of the identifying "hand," the telegraph clerk's and the censor's
mark cannot be distinguished from the author's (a common literary plot device
in the fiction of the period). The notion of a telegram's "fidelity" therefore
becomes an attribute of the communication channel as a whole (instead of an
attribute attached to authorial intent).

## the crisis of authenticity

It is quite odd, if you think about it, to believe that objects somehow retain
an aura or a trace of their history: "a handkerchief used by Princess Diana,"
or "the cigar box owned by President Kennedy." In some real sense, the
historical patina covering these objects is only imagined. President Kennedy's
fingerprints and the tears of Princess Diana have long disappeared from their
physical medium. Their trace cannot be reduced to "mere" physical
characteristics: that is, to actual scratches, stains, or molecules,
recoverable from the object. Rather, the object had to "be there" in some way,
acquiring a patina of authenticity. "Having been there" is what gives the
object value, sentimental or otherwise, in a condition that refuses formal
reduction to a set of merely material properties. The high price contemporary
society places on authentic artifacts is therefore a type of magical thinking.
Walter Benjamin's famous essay on the work of art in the age of mechanical
reproduction appears to both celebrate and lament the demise of such magic.
"The technique of reproduction detaches the reproduced object from the domain
of tradition," wrote Benjamin. "By making many reproductions it substitutes a
plurality of copies for a unique existence. And in permitting the reproduction
to meet the beholder or listener in his own particular situation, it
reactivates the object reproduced. These two processes lead to a tremendous
shattering of tradition which is the obverse of the contemporary crisis and
renewal of mankind" [@benjamin_work_1969, 217-253]. And yet, for Benjamin, the
easy reproducibility of modern art forms like film and photography also
"emancipates the work of art from its parasitical dependence on ritual"
[@benjamin_work_1969, 217-253]. One could read Benjamin's famous essay as a
piece of technological nostalgia, or as an expose on the magic and superstition
latent in modernist art. Crisis or emancipation? Benjamin feels both, and in
doing so he captures the metaphysical anxiety of the modern age. We desire for
our Vermeers to stay special but also for a Vermeer to hang in every home,
peering back at us from a multitude of anonymous reproductions.

The modern world faces the challenge of authenticity, which we have only began
to assimilate: politically, economically, and philosophically. The ubiquitous
holographic certificate of authenticity on a luxury handbag or on a "Digital
Versatile Disk" (how antiquated the DVD sounds already!) is a cheap band-aid
hiding the immaterial nature of these artifacts. Fashion and software companies
are reluctant to talk publicly about piracy,[^ln11-counter] because the so
called "knock-offs" are essentially exact duplicates, often "leaked" from the
very same factories producing the original.

Note that it makes no sense to talk about "what was meant" by the designer of
the handbag, the way textual critic may talk about authorial intention. Nor
would it make sense to "correct" some perceived flaw in the painting by
Vermeer. The practice parallel to "textual criticism" in visual arts is
restoration. Although similar to textual criticism in its aims to recover some
notion of the original, crucially, the practice of art restoration takes place
without reproduction. Unlike a critical volume, which essentially reprints the
work in its reconstructed entirety, restoration happens at the site. All
"unauthorized" copies constitute a forgery that competes for attention with the
original. One could say that for painting and handbags "matter is synonymous
with meaning," but the sentiment strains at the limits of critical vocabulary
in the tradition that gives us only the binaries of form and content.

The context-dependence of an artifact is not even medium-specific, as
Goodman would suggest. Texts are more allographic than handbags and paintings,
but Vermeers and Louis Vuitton purses are also in some sense perfectly
reproducible, like texts. They are texts, and I do not mean it in some
post-structuralist notion of "everything is a text."[^ln11-derrida]

Technologies like 3D scanning and printing increasingly reduce physical objects
to their textual representation, as is the case with the stereo lithographic
document (STL) format that describes objects for 3D printing.  Here, for
example, I reproduce code that describes "a surface" of a functional gun (the
code made available online by *Defense Distributed*, a self-described civic
liberty activist group):

```
22=(
BOUNDED_SURFACE()
B_SPLINE_SURFACE(1,2,((#34104,#34105,#34106),(#34107,#34108,#34109)),
 .UNSPECIFIED.,.F.,.F.,.F.)
B_SPLINE_SURFACE_WITH_KNOTS((2,2),(3,3),(15.1641909236141,15.3257778193699),
(2.99329024107099,3.14159265358979),.UNSPECIFIED.)
GEOMETRIC_REPRESENTATION_ITEM()
RATIONAL_B_SPLINE_SURFACE(((1.,0.997252058758362,1.),(1.,0.997252058758362,
1.)))
REPRESENTATION_ITEM('')
SURFACE()
);
```

This piece of code exists in its Platonic ideal *before* the physical artifact.
As costs of reproduction approach zero, so does the line between an object and
its description. Imagine a world where to think "gun" is also to seamlessly
bring one into existence. The erosion of boundaries between object and idea has
a pronounced effect on the governance of goods, felt precisely at the
distinction between the autographic and the allographic. Governments currently
regulate the manufacture and the distribution of guns as artifacts, but how
does one regulate guns as texts and ideas? Any such effort amounts to
censorship. What was first regulated under the regime of property law, now
increasingly falls under the regimes of intellectual property and rights to
speech. Where does that leave the practice of textual criticism? In such a
world there can be no distinction between works and texts. Unlike millions of
reproduced Vermeers (which no doubt occupy this world in the form of postcards,
posters, and photographs), text is text. It lies before us in glorious
flatness, as thick as a sheet of paper.

Text as I have already began to define it Chapter One, is a digital mode of
representation, defined, at least in part, by a relative lack of "stickiness"
to its physical medium. Textual artifacts therefore exhibit the dualism between
text and work to a much greater extent than other forms of art and
communication. A Vermeer is always a work. Not so with *Hamlet*. "Hamlet" may
indicate a category of relate, or, an individual instance of a given work.
Philosophers Nelson Goodman and Catherine Elgin explain this peculiarity by
making the distinction between "works of art whose identity depends on their
history of production" and works whose identity does not. The former they call
"autographic" and the latter "allographic" [@goodman_reconceptions_1988, 65].
These terms will be useful for us throughout the book. Architecture and
painting, in this view, are strongly autographic disciplines. An exact copy of
a Vermeer or of a building by Frank Lloyd Wright could never rise to the status
of the original. The originals have what Walter Benjamin called an "aura or
authenticity." No amount of precision, down to the molecular level, could
substitute for the historical patina of the original artifact.

### 5.4 Problem of Drafts

Text as vector. Barthes: text as "an organism which grows by vital
expansion"[@barthes_work_1978, 161].  "The metaphor of the Text is that of the
*network*" [@barthes_work_1978, 161].

Internet is not rhyzomatic. Mediation is at stake. " But the bottom line is
that dumb-pipe email is unmediated, and therefore it's a business that Google
wants to get out of as soon as it can."

" It's also why I believe Google will kill Gmail as soon as it comes up with a
mediated alternative everyone loves. Of course, Google may offer an antiquated
"Gmail view" as a semi-obscure alternative to the default "Inbox"-like mediated
experience."

Problem of Drafts and Versions Documents as vectors. Not completed things.
Files as cognitive scaffolding for collective memory. Vissman.

Science lecture vs. humanities. Stuff that is known. Stuff that is not known

What does it really mean to "know" something? Or to have "read" a book? I have
had the following conversation countless times. Someone asks, "Have you read
Nabokov's *Pale Fire*," and I respond, "Yes I have." But there is a world of a
difference between reading it yesterday, last week, or ten years ago. The book
as an interface leaves an organic trace in the human mind---an imprint that
begins to fade as soon as it is created.

How much knowledge is there in the world? According to a recent paper published
in Science, 295 exabytes (or billion gigabytes).[@hilbert_info_2012;]

Whatever consciousness is, it is propelled forward on a thin edge of material
substratum. Reality exists only in the now, where the past is a memory and the
future only a possibility. Imagine whispering something to a friend. It does
not have to be very complicated, something like "I love you" or "I miss you."
The whisper dissipates as soon it is uttered. The percussion of the speaker's
breath creates temporary order: giving shape and pushing air molecules into
waves of pattern and form. That order begins dissipating as soon as it is
created. Within milliseconds, molecules return to their natural state of chaos.

To steel ourselves against entropy, we change the substratum from air to stone.
It's molecules are more stable. Etched in stone will be the same message. It
will last longer now. But it will also take longer to create. You will have to
carry around your tablet and chisel. The message etched in stone will outlive
the whisper and indeed will

Repercussion? How we preserve ourselves today affects the future. Appointment
with self.

Leroi-Gourhan, André.

The book as an interface between human and ?. We must see it in the context of
interfaces.

Wikipedia as a Turing complete language. The power of versioning. Text as a
vector. The problem of annotation. What are we annotating? Annotation solutions
force a platform. Is Hamlet a platonic object? A family of related objects?
Standard English editions in Europe.

related to the plummeting costs of digital
reproduction. The supposedly "dead" authors continue to draw checks from
copyrighted work. 


### Labor
### 5.1 The Human Assumption (Heidegger + marx)

I can only begin to work of re-inscribing the A more careful analysis of
"microscopically written inscriptions" [@kittler_there_1995] in the in the
passage between typewriters and personal computers, reveals plenty of space for
human agency. Media determine our situation only to the extent that we continue
to treat the everyday transformation of thought into pixel (and thereto into
literary control systems that structure human experience) as mystical and
mystifying black-box mechanism.

Engineer vs. brick levi strauss?

Derrida calls Marx "first thinkers of technics, or even, by far and from afar,
of the tele-technology [@derrida_specters_2006, 213].

Let me make my intentions visa vis Marx perfectly clear. I have no interest in
mobilizing the entire weight of Marxist critique. A whole subset of Marxist
terminology (dictatorship, proletariat, capital) falls outside of my purview
here. Rather, I would like to co-opt Marx's discussion on the fetishism of
commodities and import it, wholesale, to the conversation on algorithms. My
interest lies in the humanism of Marx, whose thought, despite being perpetually
out of time, continues to surprise with penetrating insight.

"All these software mutations and 'new species' of software techniques are
social in a sense that they don't simply come from individual minds or from
some 'essential' properties of a digital computer or network. They come from
software developed by groups of people and marketed to large number of
users"[@manovich_there_2011, 272-273].

"An [algorithm] is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the
social character of men's [agreements] appears to them as an objective
character stamped upon the product of those [agreements]." "There it is a
definite social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the
fantastic form of a relation between things." "The relations connecting the
[agreements] of one individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct
social relations between individuals at work, but as what they really are,
material relations between person and social relations between things."
[@marx_marx-engels_1978, 321] "These quantities vary continually, independently
of the will, foresight and action of the producers.  To them, their own social
action takes the form of the action of objects, which rule the producers
instead of being ruled by them." To strip the "mystical veil," algorithms as
contracts between "freely associated men" [@marx_marx-engels_1978, 327]. "this
automatism outside the head" .Necromancy.

Hijack the whole conversation from the

The subject is back. Unlike natural-language texts where meaning is derived in
conversation between reader and author, algorithms and control codes have
unambigious meaning, that ensure reliable reproduction. The environment is
controlled. The codes are tested. The will is there!

Derrida "If one follows the letter of the text, the critique of the ghost or of
spirits would thus be the critique of a subjective representation and an
abstraction, of what happens in the head, of what comes only out of the head,
that is, of what stays there, in the head, even as it has come out of there,
out of the head, and survives outside the head" [@derrida_specters_2006, 215].

In religion people make their empirical world into an entity that is only
conceived, imagined, that confronts them as something foreign
[@marx_collected_1976, 159].

imagined commodity = algorithm labor = contracts, agreements

Heidegger revealment.

I am able to now finally confront the ghostly apparition present throughout in
the background Much of what today goes by the term new materialism is
materialism in the sense of talking about and privileging a certain idea of
object-oriented consciousness. Some go even as far as to elevate objects to the
status of political and ethical agents, as when.

It is tempting to think that alienation come from phase one. Human displacement
from the hand. Some notion of analog as natural and digital as artificial

The belief that the organic is the chief criterion of what is authentic in art
and life continues, it need hardly be said, to have great force with us, the
more as we become alarmed by the deterioration of the organic environment
[trilling].

The passage between thought and its physical manifestation, whether
intra-cranial, as a configuration of neurons and synapses, or external, as a
note to self or a novel, is an unsolved problem in science. Like the gap
between mind and brain, the distance between thought and text has not yet been
bridged.

What happened to our writing implements? First came the typewriter and
philosophers thought it would ruin humanity. Then, with the computer, software
engineers thought they saw a glimpse of textuality capable of transcendence.
Then came Microsoft Word. And worse yet, the box: the ubiquitous internet
browser text box that just does very little. Ctrl-Copy, Cntrl-Paste.

Containing an argument for text as an interface between human and machine.
Isomorphism. Search. Protocol - interface. What you see is what you get. What
you see is not what you get. Argument for text. Desktop publishing. Stream vs.
Object containers.

What is a well-formed thought? Is being able to communicate one's reasoning
clearly an integral part of clear reasoning? Can one think well, but write
poorly? Or does thinking well in a sense also mean writing well? I don't mean
to ask these questions to start an argument about cognition or rhetoric.
Rather, I would appeal to the intuitive sense of connection between the written
and the mental worlds and to simply note the natural correspondence between the
two. There is a bit of magic in that correspondence—the kind of magic that
becomes transparent (and disappears from view) through acclimation. Here is a
simple to-do list from my partner. For some moments after reading it, her will
has become my command. My arms and legs move under the spell of her bidding.
For her part, she has ensured that the list reflects what she wants me to do.
That is, it reflects what she wants. And in her absence, the to-do list did
represent her volition accurately. I read it as a testament to her will; I was
able to internalize the instructions; and then I acted on their behalf. We may
say that the to-do list was used to synchronize an aspect of our mental lives.
It was an interface of sorts, which has allowed us to bridge two separate
mental worlds, mediated by a piece of paper. And yet how quickly we discard it!
The interface itself is perhaps too thin and transparent to hold our (critical)
attention.

"A text editor is often the primary interface between a user and the system,
and the program with which most user time is spent. Accordingly, an editor has
to be easy to use, and efficient of the user's time---editing commands have to
'flow off the fingertips.'" [@kernighan_unix_1978, 2117].

Containing an argument for text as an interface between human and machine.
History of combinatorial languages and logic.  Stack as a model of
communication

"Pen is Mightier than a Sword" by Pam A. Mueller and Daniel M. Oppenheimer.

Southall. Interfaces between the designer and the document

It may seem at first a bit odd to put the words "style" and "cognition" in the
same sentence, but the concept of "cognitive style" is well-articulated in the
scientific literature on the psychology of personality. The idea of cognitive
stylistics was developed first by the American followers of Carl Jung, who like
Katharine Cook Briggs and her daughter Isabel Briggs Myers (of the still
ubiquitous Myers-Briggs Type Indicator offered by career placement centers
across the country) were interested in applying insights from
quantitatively-based psychological observation (psychometrics) to problems of
labor and education. In the early 1950s, the idea of "personality type" gave
way to "cognitive style" in the work of psychologists George Klein, Philip
Holzman, Riley Gardner, and Herbert Schlesinger.1 For this new generation of
scholars, the concept meant something like "the individual differences in
adaptive modes of organizing and experiencing the stimulus world."2 That is to
say that people simply have or develop a preference for a particular mode of
thinking about and perceiving the world. Or even simpler: "everyone does it in
his own way."3 Thus, in an early experiment Gardner observes a group of people
categorizing objects by size, shape, and color. Predictably, different people
perceive the differences between size, shape, and color in differing
gradations.4 The converse of this experiment suggests also that certain modes
of material organization favor a particular style of thought. We may assume,
for example, that certain ways of organizing the world attract or "make sense"
to a particular type of person. In the literature on education, the concept is
therefore popular within the discussion of learning styles, by which teachers
are encouraged to present their material in ways accessible to students with
varying preferences for visual, auditory, tactile, or kinesthetic learning.

The hypothesis of cognitive styles underlies a particular belief about the
connection between mental organization and the organization of objects in the
real world. It is what Heidegger called "the correlation between being, word,
gathering, hand, and writing"5 and perhaps what Nietzsche meant when he wrote
that "our writing tools are also working on our thoughts."6 Heidegger in
particular is often cited in this regard. In his meditation on Parmenides,
delivered as a series of lectures during the war at the University of Freiburg,
Heidegger is clearly bothered by what he perceives as the "irruption of the
typewriter into the realm of the world of handwriting."7 Ever in search of
essences, he imagines hand-writing to possess a special kind of magic, denoting
"an original essential nexus, to which the indicating writing-hand belongs." He
continues to say that: [...] in handwriting the relation of Being to man,
namely the word, is inscribed in beings themselves. The origin and the way of
dealing with writing is already in itself a decision about the relation of
Being and of the word to man and consequently a decision about the comportment
of man to beings and about the way both, man and thing, stand in
unconcealedness or are withdrawn from it.8

The typewriter somehow disturbs this idyllic picture, withdrawing "from man the
essential rank of the hand, without man's experiencing this withdrawal
appropriately and recognizing that it has transformed the relation of Being to
his essence."9 In my favorite bit of condescension from the old master,
Heidegger goes as far as to suggest that his readers misunderstand him
precisely because type-setting is so groundless. "The typewriter is a signless
cloud," he writes, "a withdrawing concealment in the midst of its very
obtrusiveness […] not showing itself to its essence." "Perhaps that is why most
of you, as is proven to me by your reaction, though well-intended, have not
grasped what I have been trying to say."10

What is Heidegger trying to say here? And what precisely is being concealed by
the typewriter? In "The Question Concerning Technology," originally published
in 1954, Heidegger explains that technology is primarily a mode of revealing
truth. To make this point, Heidegger begins with an analysis of a specific
artifact—a silver chalice used for ceremonial rights. Initially, it seems that
the primary purpose of the artifact is to facilitate something, the
administration of ceremonial rites in this case. The cup is an instrument for
something, in other words; it is a means to an end. Another way to put it would
be to say that the ceremony is the cause for the cup's very existence. But
there is more than just causa finalis, as Heidegger puts it. The physical
properties of silver (causa materialis) also constitute a cause, as does the
shape of the cup (causa formalis), and as does the silversmith who has
fashioned the vessel (the silversmith being causa efficiens). In fact the cup's
very instrumentality is grounded in this chain of causation. The cup is an
occasion to bring forth the ceremony; to bring forth a certain property of
silver; to bring forth the water-containing property of the vessel's shape; and
finally to bring forth the craft of the silversmith. The making of the cup is
not mere "handicraft manufacture," Heidegger writes, nor is it "only artistic
and poetical bringing into appearance and concrete imagery," but rather a
"bringing-forth, "poiesis in the highest sense."11

At its best, technology reveals truth. At this point of the essay Heidegger
makes a distinction between traditional technology or "handicraft," and modern,
machine-powered technology.12 Modern technology also reveals, writes Heidegger.
But it does not "unfold into a bringing-forth in the sense of poiesis." Rather
modern technology is a challenge or a provocation [Herausfordern] to nature.
The figure of the natural betrays the extent of Heidegger's romanticism. "The
revealing that is modern technology is a challenging, which puts to nature the
unreasonable demand that it supply energy which can be extracted and stored as
such," writes Heidegger.13 "But does it hold true for the old windmill as
well?" he asks. And answers, No. Its sails do indeed turn in the wind; they are
left entirely to the wind's blowing. But the windmill does not unlock energy
from the air currents in order to store it. In contrast, a tract of land is
challenged in the hauling out of coal and ore. The earth now reveals itself as
a coal mining district, the soil as a mineral deposit. The field that the
peasant formerly cultivated and set in order appears different from how it did
when to set it in order still meant to take care of and to maintain. The work
of the peasant does not challenge the soil of the field. In sowing grain he
places seed in the keeping of the forces of growth and waits over its increase.
[By contrast] agriculture is now the mechanized food industry. Air is now set
upon to yield nitrogen, the earth to yield ore, ore to yield uranium, for
example; uranium set upon to yield atomic energy, which can be released either
for destruction or for peaceful use.14

The passage is remarkable for its apparent prescience of the contemporary
environmental conservation movement, which often implies a similar conservative
romanticism about handicraft technology. Both ideologies contain a particular
notion of "authentic" or "unadulterated" state of nature, which is
"challenged," to use Heidegger's terminology, by the tools of modern
technology. Handicraft, by contrast, is seen as an activity that operates in
harmony with nature, without undue disturbance. This view is of course
historically incorrect. Pre-modern hunting practices and agriculture have often
led to large-scale ecological disturbances: pollution, species extinction, and
deforestation. In this context, the distinction between modern and pre-modern
itself begins to seem arbitrary. The latent romantic naturalism strains under
further scrutiny. The silver chalice, for example, can be seen as the
culmination of a long and destructive process of mining, ore processing,
smelting, and manufacture, which at each stage involves the very opposite of
Heidegger's ideal non-disruptive poiesis.

A more chartable reading of the passage would attempt to place Heidegger's
critique of modern technology in the context of his phenomenology. Heidegger's
phenomenology is a weighty, but well-explored topic, and for this reason I will
limit our discussion to its most generally-known and relevant features. For
Heidegger, our knowledge of the world comes in two flavors: presentness-at-hand
[Vorhandenheit] and readiness-to-hand [Zuhandenheit]. When we think of some
object in the world—a hammer, to use the famous example—we first imagine
something like the formal definition of a hammer in a series of knowable facts
about the object: a hammer is made of metal and wood, we use it to pound nails,
it is man's first tool, and so on. The type of epistemological knowledge about
the world, the knowledge that combines the readily observable properties and
our shared understanding of the object, is called "present-to-hand" in
Heidegger's system. "Ready-to-hand" knowledge by contrast is practical. I know
something about the hammer, but I also have used a hammer—and in using it I
understood the tool in an applied manner. But more than that, in using the
hammer I understand something about the nail. An essential property of the
transition between theoretical and applied knowledge of the world, is the
disappearance of the tool. For Heidegger, the tool literally becomes a kind of
"sight," helping us identify properties of the world that are particularly
well-suited for its application. "Action has its own kind of sight," Heidegger
writes in Being and Time.15 The hammer helps us experience the nail in a
hammering kind-of-a-way. Hammering reveals something about the nail, and by
extension, about metals in general. At the bottom of this experience is man's
relationship to nature itself. All "good" technologies work in that way for
Heidegger. "Technology comes to presence in the realm where revealing an
unconcealment take place, where aletheia, truth, happens," he writes in "The
Question Concerning Technology."16 The plow reveals something about the earth,
just as the windmill reveals something about the air current.

Modern technology reveals too, but it breaks the "natural" phenomenological
experience in two important ways. First, the tool fails to fully disappear into
the experience. I imagine this to be the same kind of a feeling a musician has
when playing an unfamiliar instrument. The instrument "stands in the way" of
the unity between man and music. Second, the modern instrument introduces a
kind of a perceptual bias. It treats nature as a reserve of energy [Bestand]—as
a kind of a storehouse, an inventory, or a collection. Whereas the farmer's
plow reveals the earth as fertile ground, the tractor reveals it to be a mere
resource for mechanized agriculture. The earth ceases to be an object of
knowledge, amenable to other ways of knowing. In this way, modern technology
works to "order" or to "enframe" matter, interfering with the very process of
truth-formation. Moreover, just as the earth ceases to be the object of
knowledge, the ordering—or to use the very un-Heideggerian term, the
commodification—of natural resources threatens to turn the human into a
resource. For Heidegger, modern technology disrupts the status of the human as
a proper subject:

Only to the extent that man for his part is already challenged to exploit the
energies of nature can this revealing which orders happen. If man is
challenged, ordered, to do this, then does not man himself belong even more
originally than nature within the standing–reserve? The current talk about
human resources, about the supply of patients for a clinic, gives evidence of
this. The forester who measures the felled timber in the woods and who to all
appearances walks the forest path in the same way his grandfather did, is today
ordered by the industry that produces commercial woods, whether he knows it or
not. He is made subordinate to the orderability of cellulose, which for its
part challenged forth by the need of paper, which is then delivered to
newspapers and illustrated magazines.

The commodification of both subject and object commodifies phenomenology
itself. One can perceive more than a hint of Marx in this line of critique.  If
the plow reveals something about the earth, the pen reveals something about
language. The relationship between man and language is of a primary importance
to Heidegger. In the realm of language, man stands in relation to being itself.
Heidegger's own discourse often progresses through a series of etymological
reconstructions, which contain an almost mystical sense of reverence for the
veracity of meaning contained in the original, Greek understanding of a given
concept. By similar logic, the hand represents a "pure," unadulterated
relationship of man to language. The hand "contains an essence of the human
being because the word, as the essential region of the hand, is the essential
ground of being human."17 In the metaphoric juxtaposition between word and
ground, the analogy between pen and plow becomes apparent. And just like
mechanized agriculture, mechanized writing "deprives the hand of dignity in the
realm of the written word and degrades the word to a mere means for the traffic
of communication."18 The typewriter commodifies language in other words,
turning it into the "standing reserve" of information. "In mechanized writing
all humans begin to look the same," writes Heidegger.19 Intermedia as
Syncopation between Human, Machine, and Language It has been suggested that
Heidegger's distaste for mechanized writing stemmed from his inability to
type.20 Don Ihde, a contemporary authority on Heidegger's philosophy of
technology, suggests that all new mechanisms go through an awkward stage of
sorts, in which they still feel unfamiliar to us, and therefore disruptive in
the way an unfamiliar instrument is "in the way" of music for a musician. But
with time, these technologies once again become transparent to us, and the link
between man and language is once again restored in the fluent hands of a nimble
typist.21 Such an attempt to "de-romanticize"22 Heidegger's argument cannot
fully diffuse the rhetorical force of his critique. Heidegger's romanticism
continues to exert considerable influence on contemporary thought, particularly
when it comes to the discussion about emerging technology, and especially in
the fields of literary and cultural studies. Perhaps the most visible (in a
sense of well-known and often-cited) example of this trend is Friedrich
Kittler's 1986 Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. In the conclusion of this
book-length study, Kittler brings the Heideggerian rhetoric to its natural
paranoiac crescendo: "A simple feed-back loop—and information machines bypass
humans—their so-called inventors […] Electronics, a tube monster since
Bletchley Park, replaces discourse, and programmability replaces free will […]
Under the condition of high technology, literature has nothing more to say. It
ends in cryptograms that defy interpretation and only permit interception." As
evidence for this vision, Kittler submits a letter/poem which resembles a
nonsensically-encoded communiqué addressed to Truman, Roosevelt, Stalin, and
Churchill.23 A more tempered position, along the same Heideggerian lines, was
advanced by Erich Kahler, a prominent American literary critic writing in the
1960s, who saw the history of the avant-garde movements in the 20th century
following a downward trajectory of formal disintegration—from the initial
purging of sentiment in the nouveau roman, to the dissolution of language in
the final "typographical stage" of literary development.24 Kahler's ultimate
worry was over what he called "the triumph of incoherence," which leads to "the
dissolution of the linguistic form," "the divorce of language from its human
source," and finally, to the destruction of consciousness itself (when
consciousness for him is defined as coherent perception of the world25). "What
started as poetry," writes Kahler, "ends up in typography."26 "Under the
fanfares of thrilling innovations sounding everywhere, from Brazil to Iceland,
literature fades away, not only into graphics, but into motley sound
associations and mechanistic regimentation:" The overwhelming preponderance of
collectivity with its scientific, technological and economic machinery, the
daily flow of new discoveries and inventions that perpetually change aspects
and habits of thought and practice, the increasing incapacity of individual
consciousness to cope with the abstract anarchy of its environment, and its
surrender to a collective consciousness that operates anonymously and diffusely
in our social and intellectual institutions—all this has shifted the center of
gravity of our world from existential to functional, instrumental, and
mechanical ways of life. At the same time the hypertrophy of functional
rationalization has produced an overcompensating irrationality, reversing to
the bodily concrete or spiraling to the absurd. Hence the products of the
avant-gardes display a strange blend of erratic imaginative vagaries with
technological and pseudo-scientific aspirations. Fragments of unconscious and
sensory experience are in a ghostly manner treated with an exactitude derived
from the rational consciousness and information.27 

I take Kahler's reaction to concrete poetry as an eloquent, if somewhat
misguided, expansion of Heidegger's "typewriters are ruining things" thesis.
The argument is again a restatement of the connection between technology,
language, and consciousness—a triad that resurfaces every few decades as a
manifestation of our collective technophobic hypochondria.

In my understanding, the practice of concrete poetry stands in diametric
opposition to the thesis advanced by Heidegger, Kittler, and Kahler—a vision of
literary dissolution under the conditions of high technology. The artifice of
Emmett Williams's "Sometimes" (Figure 4.1) lies in the reinserting of the
writing implement into the protected world of the poetic. The poem is
impossible without the machine. Reading or reciting it is not enough: we are
meant to type, or at least to imagine typing the poem. Classical scansion is
not sufficient either. We must be able to imagine the rhythm of the typewriter:
the sharp hammer-like movement of its type-bars, the clicking of the platern,
the whizzing sound and the bell of the lever-operated carriage return. The
typewriter "thinks" in so far as it suggests a particular style—of writing,
thinking—a style that has an impetus, a logic, and a poetry of its own. The
rhythmic impetus of the typewriter pulls the poem along a particular metric
trajectory. The poet disrupts that logic with a correction. The resulting
grapheme, documents the interruption, and in the process pulls the material
world into the literary. The smudge of the ribbon, the rejected versions of the
poem, the mark of the proofreader, and yes the typewriter itself—all of these
"extra-literary" elements of the creative process are elevated to the status of
the poetic. Another way to describe the dynamic between literature and
technology in this case, would be to say that the concretist aesthetic
appropriates the extra-functional elements of the writing mechanism. What
initially seems a mere artifact of literary production becomes art. Literature
thus taints technology, stripping away the pretense of pure functionalism.
Under the condition of the literary, to reverse Kittler here, technology gains
a new voice. Nothing is determined about the encounter between human, machine,
and language. Each element of this triad contains a mere suggestion of rhythm
and pace. The resulting symphony is a syncopation of all three elements. There
is of course nothing particularly modern about his dynamic. The printing press
introduced a particular poetics into the language as well. It is just that
after a time, the cognitive style of the printing press has become transparent
to us, particularly after publishing had congealed into a relatively stable
system of production and distribution. The advent of the typewriter, of desktop
publishing, and of distributed, online models of publication destabilizes the
established stylistics. With each of these advancements we worry anew about the
impact of technology on our way of thinking—a concern that goes back to the
introduction of writing itself, as in Plato's Phaedrus.

The history of concrete poetry can be seen as the culmination of one such
shift, spurred on by the transference of type-setting from the printer to the
author. This dynamic may explain the simultaneous eruption of concrete poetry
across multiple literary traditions. "The confused geography of its beginnings
reflects the universality of its roots," Williams writes.28 He then suggests
the following signposts upon this landscape: the "constellation" poetry of
Eugene Gomerenger; the posters of Carlo Belloli and F.T. Marinetti; the
Noigandres poets of Sao Paulo; the work of the Danish poet Oyvin Fahlstrom; the
ideagrams of Dieter Roth; the sound-poetry experiments of the East German poet
Carlfriedrich Claus; the collaborative work of the Vienna composer Gerhard
Ruhm, architecht Friedrich Achleitner, a jazz musician Oswald Weiner, and the
poets H.C. Atmann and Konrad Bayer in the early fifties; and finally Williams's
own work with the Darmstadt Circle, which included the Kitasano Katue of Japan
and the German dramaturgist Claus Bremer.29 To this topography we could add an
increasingly long list of "intermedial" work by Vladimir Mayakovsky and
Guillame Apollinaire in the early 1920s, several of Lewis Carroll's poetic
experiments, and much work from non-western traditions, in alphabets that have
always contained a strong visual element (Chinese, Arabic, etc).  In this
light, concrete poetry can be seen as the culmination of a particular
techno-cognitive style—a full-blown artistic movement which peaks at the
eclipse of the typewriter age. The cognitive style of concrete poetry, if one
may speak of such a thing, is one of cross-modal perception. It literally
attempts to engage areas of the brain not normally affected by passive reading.
Artists associated with Fluxus and concrete poetry were committed to the
development of what they called intermedia. In his 1966 "Statement on
Intermedia," Dick Higgins, the Cambridge-born poet, composer, and publisher,
writes: For the last ten years or so, artists have changed their media to suit
this situation, to the point where the media have broken down in their
traditional forms, and have become merely puristic points of reference. The
idea has arisen, as if by spontaneous combustion throughout the entire world,
that these points are arbitrary and only useful as critical tools, in saying
that such-and-such a work is basically musical, but also poetry. This is the
intermedial [sic] approach, to emphasize the dialectic between the media. A
composer is a dead man unless he composes for all the media and for his
world.30 The spontaneous invention of this artistic program in Switzerland,
Italy, Argentina, Germany, and the United States31 is contemporaneous with the
turn to cross-modal perception studies in post-war psychology. At the core of
this shared program is a new understanding of cognitive stylistics. As Marshal
McLuhan, himself associated with the Fluxus movement, wrote in his 1967
Verbi-Voco-Visual Explorations, "the physics of typographic lineality have
dominated our perception."32 But, as Kahler notes in his anti-concretist
polemic, this approach has also erased the boundaries between the
socially-constructed categories that separate the literary from the visual and
auditory arts. With that expansion come the loss of specificity and the
dissolution of the protective barriers that usually separate genre and medium.
Fluxus could thus be viewed as a type of cognitive calisthenics, designed to
loosen the rigidity of fixed mental perception—a mental rigidity reinforced by
the rigidity in cultural categories (epistemology).  



## Labor, Energy

Literature hides the labor of readers and writers. In another sense, there is
also the concealment of raw, physical energy that "goes into the word." The
work it takes to get a rock up a mountain gives it potential energy to roll
back down. By definition, potential energy relates to the possibility of "work
done." The rock can pull something up the hill as it is falling down, for
example. What of the energy that went into the writing of these sentences? I
spent a few *joules* compressing the springs under my keyboard. Many more went
into my laptop as electric current. Why? To overcome matter's passive impedance
of advancing change. To preserve and to communicate this message *amperes*, the
unit of electrical flow, struggled with *ohms*, the unit of electrical
resistance.

There is energy too in the librarian's effort to archive a book, in the
churning of a search engine to make it accessible to a reading public, and in
the work of a truck driver who ferries information by road. The sum of these
energies, which seem significant now in their accumulation, went into the
writing of these words. Much of it dissipated as heat and light. And some of
it---just a small part---left an imprint somewhere. It left a trace of ink on a
page, magnetized a piece of tape, or shifted the configuration of the floating
gate buried within the solid state drive. Finally, the potential energy
remaining within the word began a chain of electrical reactions in the reader's
brain. The mental effort or reading and writing amounts to "knowledge
work."[@liu_laws_2004] Ultimately, writing serves to connect the electrical
circuitry of at least two neurological systems. Reading leaves the brain in a
different state than before. Writing, in this light, involves the transmission
of neural activity between hosts. When considered as a physical process,
literature is a type of electroencephalography (EEG), or electric head writing.

![The place of linguistic structure among "the facts of language". Saussure's communication circuit [@saussure_course_1986, 11].](images/saussure.jpg)

Ferdinand de Saussure's paradigmatic circuit model of communication (pictured
here) follows from head to head. In *Plain Text*, I will complicate that
picture by tracing the passage of thought further from *inscription* to a
*device*. At each stage of the passage, we will observe the process of encoding
and decoding, by which one type of substance---a thought---is converted into
another type: a word or the oscillation of an electrical current. I will
present here a type of a materialist reading practice, which pays attention to
the physical properties of the communication act. I will give that practice a
name---microanalysis---and a purpose: to uncover the energy gained or lost in
the transformation from code to code and from medium to medium.

I am concerned with energy because too often our foundational models of reading
and interpretation take the text as a fixed given. Even in our most
destabilizing readings, like Jacques Derrida's "Plato's Pharmacy", the
materiality of the text is assumed to persevere. "We will take off here from
the *Phaedrus*," Derrida writes [@derrida_dissemination_1981, 66]. "The reader
can count the lines" at the "precisely calculated center of the dialogue"
[@derrida_dissemination_1981, 67]. Plato's dialog has for Derrida a definite
beginning, middle, and end. Derrida asks the reader "to return to the text,"
even when the text "remains forever imperceptible"
[@derrida_dissemination_1981, 63 & 95].[^ln1-translate] When Derrida talks in
this usual way of a literary scholar, he uses the word "text" in two distinct
ways: one, as an abstract mental construct---the one that is "forever
imperceptible," and the physical one, which has a definite and stable
topography---the one to which we return with confidence.

In the vision of post-structural poetics, the text in the abstract resembles
the quicksand of unstable signifies. In other words, one can define a word only
in relation to other words. In this way, Derrida describes texts as
"dissimulation of the woven texture," "a web that envelops a web," and "an
organism, indefinitely regenerating its own tissue behind the cutting trace,
the decision of each reading" [@derrida_dissemination_1981, 63]. In *Plain
Text*, I want to further challenge the stability of the text as a physical
artifact. The literary device reconfigures the text dynamically in the process
of reading. Because the text is no longer fixed into a stable medium, we must
do away with page numbers, for example. Pagination changes according to the
size of the device. More intrusively, the reader cannot rely on finding the
same text upon return. The writer, the book seller, or the censor have the
technological capacity to alter the text in real time, even as the book rests
in hand or on a shelf.


IBM Format

By 1932 the ITU documents list two new standards, International Telegraphic
Alphabet No. 1 (ITA-1) and International Telegraphic Alphabet No. 2 (ITA-2).
The ITA formats, like the Baudot, represented latin characthers in a system of
fixed-lenght "bit" codes, For example, in ITA-1 the letter "A" and the number
"1" are both represented by `-++++`; "X" and "," by `+-++-`, and the "error"
code by `+++--` [@itu_telegraph_1932, 34]. Because the devices are not
synchronized, the pause between each transmitted character can vary in length.
For this reason ITA-2 includes two extra bits for indicating "start" and stop"
elements. The letter "A" and a hyphen in ITA-2 would be encoded as `0110001`,
where ones and zeros represent the absence and the presence of
current[@itu_telegraph_1932, 36].

By the 1960, multiple competing character encodings existed in the United
States and globally.

ASCII.
Plain text in Unix. Human readability. TROFF.

Further separation. On benefits of computer-aided document preparation. "The
style or format of the document can be decoupled from its content; the only
format control information that need be embedded is that describing textual
categories and boundaries, such as titles, section headings, paragraphs, and
the like [@kernighan_unix_1978, 2116]

Plain and fancy Text Unix system. What you see is not what you get. What is
plain text. Unix ideas of plain text. ASCII. From form and content to content,
semantic markup, and typesetting. Semantic markup as part of the
extra-linguistic meaning making.

http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr29/ The concept of Grapheme Clusters.

Semantic markup is interesting because it contains both material and ideal. The
way textuality is encoded mediates between idea and matter. Mediation. Visible
form and hidden form.

The theory of preaching. Lectures on homiletics (1892). Plain text vs. obscure
text.o

John Charles Ryle
Expository Thoughts on the Gospels: For Family and Private Use. With the ...

"One plain text is worth a thousand arguments."

Words: Their Use and Abuse
Say plain things in a plain way.

Time and truth reconciling the moral and religious world to Shakespeare: the
 By B. S. Naylor
"Thus it is, that the plain text, the obvious meaning, of Shakespeare, is
dostorted by Commentators and beclouded by Illustrators" (p64)

"One plain text is worth a thousand"

Signal Book, United States Army: 1916

## Arendt, Fanon, Tosaka Jun
### 5.3 Fanon + arendt

### 5.4 Freedom of Information

Engelbart's lab adopted a conspicuously recursive methodology they called
"bootstrapping," by which research into creating better research was done by
enabling research [@engelbart_research_1968, 395]. Elsewhere, Engelbart
explains bootstrapping "as a process wherein the results of a given effort are
fed back into the activity in a reinforcing way, so that less internal energy
is required to achieve bigger results faster." In that light, the production of
the technical report quoted here was not an activity incidental and secondary
to research, but was the stated object of research itself.

"A short computer program that is permanently resident or easily loaded into a
computer and whose execution brings a larger program, such as an operating
system or its loader, into memory" [@ieee_ieee_1990, 13].

"the techniques being explored are implemented, studies, and evaluated with the
advantage of intensive everyday use" [@engelbart_augmented_1973, 12].  Much
later, in the 1990s, Engelbar

"They must bootstrap themselves into a new kind of ``think,'' into a new climate
of man-machine interaction, in which men evolve intelligent machines and
intelligent machines evolve men" [@brodey_human_1967, 86].

Engelbart borrows the idea of "bootstrapping" from . The
animation of inorganic matter

the material g

Warren Brodey Human Enhancement

Start with the clock manifesto.

CONTOROL SECURITY FREEDOM
Freedom security consistency (Furby). Control. Freedom.

"To a book collector, you see, the true freedom of all books is somewhere on his
shelves" [@benjamin_unpacking_1968, 64].

Lita Furby, who wrote one of the earliest definitive literature reviews on the
subject in the 1970s, traces the origins of object-affect fusion to William
James. In the *Principles of Psychology* James writes about what he calls the
"empirical self," which comprises the unity of all that could be called me:

Attributes ideas of autonomous technology to a Thomas, Carlyle, Charles
Dickens, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry Thoreau, mark Twain,
Henry Adams, John Ruskin, William Morris, E. E. Cummings, George Orwell, Marcel
Duchamp, and Kurt Vonnegut.

"In one definition or another autonomous technology is now a significant
transdisciplinary hypothesis in the natural and social sciences, the arts,
journalism, and even the technical specialties themselves. But how can this
be" [@winner, 19].

Faustian spirit. Striving for control. "The proof of science is technology"
[@winner, 25]. What can you actually do?

Skepticism about technological agency in the face of "unintended" or "emergent"
side effects of complex systems. If fracking for natural gas contributes to the
increase of earthquakes, that does not mean that fracking somehow "has a mind"
to destroy humanity by earthquakes.

Hypomnesis. Galloway interface p. 16. Foucault.

Winner has it as noncomprehensibility instead of autonamism.


Cleartext in encryption. The Circle. PARITY of encryption.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch/wp/2015/06/04/fbi-official-companies-should-help-us-prevent-encryption-above-all-else/

The debate over encryption erupted on Capitol Hill again Wednesday, with an FBI
official testifying that law enforcement's challenge is working with tech
companies "to build technological solutions to prevent encryption above all
else."

Ethics and Aesthetics

James: the aesthetic function is one of negation. To create art is to sculpt
reality. Ethics is similar choice making [@james, 289].

Automonous technology. Exploring all possibilities at once. Must negate some.
That is ethics. James calls this the highest form: making choices. Where do
these choices come from? What guides development?

Humanism. Agency, delibiration, consensus, dissent.


for Dissent Agency. Deliberation. Consensus. Dissent. Dissent is the least
developed of these. Engineering for dissent. The ability to create shared goals
and to exit. engagement with shared project. The subject of my next book. 

Metaphysical Dread about Computation Brian Lennon and Golumbia. The argument
basically boils down to the cultural logic of computation being complicit in
the military industrial complex. That complicity manifests itself in a shared
set of tools. By that logic: the we should also condemn the libraries' efforts
to help up archive and store information. Condemn the poets for using metaphors
because these are also used in advertising. Something perverse about that: it
is as if we would worry about knowledge because knowledge is used for
mechanisms of control.

Deeper metaphysical dread about computation, that should be understood
historically (where Lennon gets it right). You are not a gadget.

phttp://www.ernestooroza.com/
Technological Disobedience

Creating SPACE. Physical space.

Yet, to make the subjective experience strange again is to look at it through
the eyes of a stranger. Makhail Bakhtin writes (in what I think is a previously
untranslated passage):

> It is not I who looks out from the inside, but I look at myself with the eyes
of the world, strange eyes; I am possessed by another. There is no integrity of
internal and external here. To glimpse my own preocular image. The naive
confluence of self and the other in the mirror image. The surplus of the other.
There is no point of view outside of myself; I cannot access my own internal
image. From my eyes stare a stranger's eyes [@"The Man by the Mirror," Mikhail
Bakhtin]

[^ln7-bakhtin]: I reproduce the passage here it its entirety: "Falsehood and
deception, unavoidably peering out of their own correlation. The external image
of thought, feeling, the external image of the soul. It is not I who looks out
from the inside, but I look at myself with the eyes of the world, strange eyes;
I am possessed by another. There is no integrity of internal and external here.
To glimpse my own preocular image. The naive confluence of self and the other
in the mirror image. The surplus of the other. There is no point of view
outside of myself; I cannot access my own internal image. From my eyes stare a
stranger's eyes." 

> The study, conducted by Lily Tsai, an associate professor of political science
at MIT, suggests that citizens who do not follow all the laws are engaging in
“constructive noncompliance” — acts that are intended to prompt the government
to alter its policies, without necessarily challenging its overall status.  
http://newsoffice.mit.edu/2015/citizens-disobey-enact-change-0519

### 6.2 Cryptography and Steganography Legibility

Ethics of legibility.

Hobbes on secret knowledge (p43-44!)

Where cryptography is the art of secret communication, steganography is the art
of hiding the secret. "The purpose of steganography is to hide the very
presence of communication by embedding messages into innocuous-looking objects,
such as digital images," Jessica Fridrich and her colleagues write for the
proceedings of the Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers,
appropriately shortened to SPIE [@fridrich_searching_2004].

The real danger comes not from a metaphysical source, but from the superficial
similarity of print and pixel. Where the pen or the typewriter inscribe the
image directly into their paper medium, digital type passes through a series of
transformations between the keystroke and its corresponding pulse of the
cathode ray, or in the flow of liquid crystal. Secrecy and surveillance
technologies that rightly worry Kittler exist in the gap between text as medium
and text as content. They threaten literature (the something to be said) only
in so far as the mechanisms of literary production (how it is said) remain
hidden from the critical view. When the veil is lifted, we can begin to reclaim
the passage of textuality. In this process, technology remains a relatively
neutral conduit, enabling liberation and oppression alike. The physical control
of expression cannot and should not be reduced to something as seemingly
self-contingent as "the conditions of high technology." Systems of control
naturally obscure the pathways of agency. Letting go of agency as a critical
concept plays into the hand of those (human agents) that benefit directly from
the illusion of disempowerment. I view "control" in that sense not as an
ideology, but as the ability to physically alter the material conditions of
literary production, dissemination, and consumption. The transition from
mechanical typewriter to electrical word processor precisely couples code as
content and code as control.  

### 7.1 ITU

Related to secrecy.  Encrypted literature. Revealment and dissimulation. Notions of textuality as
embroiled in contemporary ideas of privacy, secrecy, and transparency.
Computation does not necessarily work for the military-industrial apparatus (as
argued by Golumbia, Lennon, and McPherson).  Recovering and preserving
textuality in computing.

Brooks Act 1965.  Man in the middle attacks.

Alice, Bob, Caryl.
http://www.computerworld.com/article/2838775/why-google-wants-to-replace-gmail.html
Communication theory of secrecy systems, shannon

Zimmermann responded by publishing the source code as a book, an act that was
constitutionally protected as free speech. 

Plain text + fleas from the Unix book should go here.

### 3.6 Smart Contracts (A Legal Interlude)

Exposing the Document Object Model that governs the production of text through
contemporary reading and writing devices gives the question of surface and
depth yet another connotation. What lies beneath the text? We are accustomed to
thinking about document structure metaphorically and answer in accord: meaning,
narrative, representation, order, discourse, or ideology. Interpretation, at
that level of analysis, happens in the head, which physically limits the
possibility of depth to personal introspection, magnetic resonance imaging, or,
at best, to an archive of extant reader responses (which in themselves need
further interpretation).

Introducing the literary device as machine, gadget, or appliance into the
formula suggests another, more literal answer. Beneath a text one finds cloth
and wood pulp and, increasingly, also glass, plastic, liquid crystal, copper,
laminates, and silicone.

The move between paper and composite device carries with it a profound shift in
the physical affordances of the deep structure supporting all subsequent,
higher-order, surface-level representations of textuality. Not much space
separates ink from paper. There, textuality lies flat, in two dimensions. What
you see is truly what you get. Not so on the screen connected to other screens.
Networked and time-shared textuality extends into the third dimension, away
from the reader and deep into the bowels of the machine. The Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) reference model of communication[^ln3-osi] describes no
less than seven layers: from the Application Layer, concerned with the
semantics of application ("all services directly comprehensible to the user
[@miller_iso_1981, 285] to the Physical Layer, providing the "mechanical,
electrical, functional, and procedural characteristics" of communication
[@ncs_open_1981; @ncs_national_1988; @day_revised_1995].[^ln3-layers] These
protocols further envelop a document already thickly stratified by the
Document Object Model.[^ln3-domlayer]

[^ln3-domlayer]: The DOM technically exists at the application layer of the OSI
model.

![A zoomed out view of the connected OSI model. Single node structure on the
left. Connected devices on the right. The user has access through the top-most
(application) level, outermost to the network [@piatkowski_iso-ansi_1980,
114-15].](images/osi.png)

These are the same layers that Alexander Galloway unites in a system of what he
calls decentralized and distributed control [@galloway_protocol_2006, 28-54].
It is distributed to be sure, although to what extent decentralized is a matter
of some debate. Like a good soldier, each device in the pictured network
internalizes dozens if not hundreds of protocols that enable the system to
function seamlessly as a whole (in the way, for example, that your machine can
at one moment connect to one wireless access point, and at another moment to
another, with minimal loss of connectivity). Yet, OSI protocols and the DOM are
also densely consolidated. They are, for example, legislated by specific
international governing bodies[^ln3-w3c], susceptible to the usual political
pitfalls of pan-global consortia.

Once bifurcated between storage and screen, the inscription travels along a
"pipeline" of protocols, undergoing a set of arbitrary transformations
throughout. On one device, that pipeline may extend just a few inches,
connecting disk storage and output display. On a network device that pipeline
can stretch across continents, spanning widely divergent regions of legal and
administrative control. The book you are reading here may be stored in another
state or country. Whatever the case may be, the subject encounters the
"protocol stack" from without, on the periphery of the onion-like network. When
paging through an electronic book (usually an OSI-compliant device displaying
DOM-structured files), for example, the reader has access only to the outputs
emanating from the application layer, and, at that, only at the exposed
"window" level of the DOM. The perceived "content" constitutes a small fraction
of the underlying "formal" topology. What you see is far less than what you
get.

[^ln3-w3c]: The International Standards Organization (ISO) in the case of OSI,
the Internet Engineering Task Force in the case of TCP/IP, and the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) in the case of the DOM.

The application layer stops at the subject. Access to the layers intrinsic to
device operation (and consequently to analysis) are sometimes "merely" obscured
and sometimes made illicit outright, as is arguably the case with U.S. Code,
Title 17, Chapter 12, §1201, titled "Circumvention of copyright protection
systems" and passed as part of the "Digital Millennium Copyright Act" (DMCA) in
1998. A literary scholar may be familiar with some provisions of American
copyright law governing text as surface representation: US Code, Title 17
extends "exclusive rights" to "copyright owners" of "literary works." The
rights include the ability to "reproduce," "to prepare derivative works," "to
distribute copies," and "to perform and to display publicly" (17.1.106).
Surface representation is further subject to professional rules of conduct,
embodied in practices of quotation, citation, and attribution (or lack thereof,
as plagiarism).

In practice, the easy reproducibility of digital text (and image) has served to
erode the efficacy of copyright restrictions as a system of laws and
regulations. The work of art in the age of digital reproduction has lost much
of its already tenuous hold on the material substratum.[^ln3-illusion] Copy
technologies from photocopiers, to desktop printers, to cheap magnetic storage
and peer-to-peer file sharing networks reduce the price of copying and
dissemination to near frictionless levels. The response from the film, game,
music, and publishing industries has been to transpose mechanisms of copyright
enforcement from legal down to the infrastructural levels of enforcement, as
software and hardware: from Code to code. In the words of Charles Clark, the
late British publisher and prominent copyright attorney, "the answer to the
machine is in the machine [@clark_copyright_1996, 81-82]"---by which he meant
that copyright enforcement should be taken up on the device level by the
International Standards Organization, the very body responsible for the DOM and
the OSI communication protocol stack [@clark_copyright_1996, 84].

As an example of how that might work, Clark cites the Copyright in Transmitted
Electronic Data Report (CITED), which suggests building "a tamper proof
software module which acts rather like indestructible tachometers installed on
long-distance coaches and lorries, recording everything that happens to the
copyrighted or commercially valuable material [...] The basic idea is to link
the 'valuable material' of intellectual property to a specific piece of
software and hardware" [@consortium_c.i.t.e.d._1994; @clark_copyright_1996,
83-84].

The emergence of embedded contractual enforcement at the level of the device
can be subsumed under the broader idea of "smart contracts." In his seminal
article on "Formalizing and Securing Relationships in Public Networks," Nick
Szabo explains that "smart contracts combine protocols, user interfaces, and
promises expressed via those interfaces to formalize and secure relationships
over computer networks" [@szabo_formalizing_1997]. Clark, CITED, and Szabo were
instrumental in the rise of smart contracts in the 1990s in an attempt to
redress the fading efficacy of legal copyright protections.[^ln3-smart] "Method
and System for Managing a Data Object so as to Comply with Predetermined
Conditions for Usage" (US5845281, issued in 1998) can be instructive in this
regard. Greg Benson and Gregory H. Urich, both of Sweden, write:

> The data object owner may want to have permanent secure control over how,
when, where, and by whom his property is used. Furthermore, he may want to
define different rules of engagement for different types of users and different
type of security depending on the value of particular objects. The rules
defined by him shall govern the automated operations enabled by data services
and networking. The owner may also sell composite objects with different rules
governing each constituent objects. Thus, it is necessary to be able to
implement variable and extensible control.

The data object, in this case, stands for any media content, from books to
music, video, and software. Rather then legislating rules for copying and
distributing media, the inventors suggest that the medium itself should contain
a control layer that would "comply with predetermined conditions of usage," in
a way that can be "universally adapted to the needs of both the owner and the
user of the data object" [@benson_method_1998, 2:55].

!["Concatenated control data and AVI file in memory" [@benson_method_1998].](images/avi-control.png)

!["Concatenated and encrypted control data and AVI file in memory"
[@benson_method_1998].](images/avi-control2.png)

The associated schematics (pictured here) show data and control codes
"concatenated" into the same underlying data structure (in this case, AVI media
container format). The seemingly innocuous "text control" layer of the 1960s,
used to specify formatting and visual style, was now extended to carry
mechanisms for legal control, tied to specific legislation.

The idea of smart contracts contains a notable artifact of implementation,
relevant to our discussion on surface reading. To the extent that control codes
are legible to the interpreter, they are also open to "abuse and
circumvention." For this reason, encryption plays a key part in the smart
contracts system. Once intertwined, data and control must be encrypted to
prevent "unauthorized access." This brings us to the glaring problem at the
very heart of smart contract implementation. The spirit of contractual law by
its very nature demands *explicit* consent. In the language of English common
law, contracts involve promises as "manifestation of intention," which "adopt
an external or objective standard for interpreting conduct
[@american_law_institute_restatement_1973, §1-2.]" The key words in this
passage are "external," "objective," and "interpretation."

By contrast, smart contracts, as described in the patent archive, must rely on
encrypted---that is, not human-legible---forms of tacit compliance: neither
external, objective, nor available for interpretation. The idea of encrypted
consent stands in stark opposition to a tradition of contract law that relies
on models of consent that involve expressed, mutual, explicit, and uncoerced
forms of acquiescence. Even if smart contracts were to be accompanied by
legible documentation (as Terms of Service, for example), the device user would
be compelled to blindly trust in the correspondence between the expressed
letter and the implicit mechanism of the document---the implementation still
enacted beyond scrutiny, as hidden, encrypted, and purposefully illegible
script.

Moreover, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) stipulates that "no
person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls
access to a work protected under this title (17.1201.a.1.A)." The letter of the
law further specifies that to "circumvent a technological measure," in this
case, means "to descramble a scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or
otherwise to avoid, bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a technological
measure, without the authority of the copyright owner (17.1201.a.3.A)." A
technological measure that "effectively controls access" is further defined as
a measure that "in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the
application of information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of
the copyright owner, to gain access to the work (17.1201.a.3.B)." For a
literary scholar, that means that, when encountering a text on a digital
device, reading sometimes *must* limit itself to surface phenomena. An attempt
at reading for depth---to discover the implemented terms of a smart contract,
for example---may carry with it a set of official (even criminal)
sanctions.[^ln3-fairuse]

The short history of DMCA "anti-circumvention" provisions is already littered
with ambiguous case law, that the Electronic Frontiers Foundation believes to
have the effect of "stifling a wide range of legitimate activities," "chilling
free expression and academic research," "jeopardizing fair use," and "impeding
innovation [@von_lohmann_unintended_2010]." Several incidents stand out as
particularly relevant to the study of texts and literature. One, a security
researcher exploring the activity of censorship filters on public library
computers was threatened and forced to seek DMCA exemption from the Librarian
of Congress [@fry_circumventing_2009]. Two, a Russian programmer speaking at a
security conference was jailed and detained for several months for developing
software that converts Adobe electronic book files into `.pdf` format, in a
process that could potentially remove embedded digital rights management
protections [@ferullo_major_2004; @mueller_reinventing_2004;
@postigo_information_2010]. Finally, in 2005 Agfa Monotype Corporation took
Adobe Systems to court in a dispute over the Adobe Acrobat "Free Text" tool,
which allowed users to "change text annotations using Plaintiff's TrueType
fonts" without a license [@_agfa_2005; @lipton_c_2009; @von_lohmann_unintended_2010]. If they become precedent, any of these cases could conceivably
be used to physically limit the efficacy of reading, close and distant.

[^ln3-fairuse]: DMCA 1201 provides for a number of complicated exemptions,
which may, under some interpretations, sanction limited use for academic
purposes. See @liu_dmca_2003; @ku_critique_2004; @herman_catch_2005;
@armstrong_digital_2006.

The impact of DMCA and smart contracts on the practices of reading, writing, and
literary analysis is potentially immense. In the language of the DMCA, the
electronic book is not a book at all, but a "data object," in which the modest
copyright symbol gives way to "control layers [@fischer_digital_2003]." An
essay in the *Yale Journal of Law & Technology* explains it this way:

> While e-books and their print counterparts embody essentially identical
> content, from a transactional standpoint they differ considerably. Books are
> tangible goods that can be owned, sold, and passed on without express
> limitation--the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) governs their sale, while
> copyright law protects their content. But despite appearances, Kindle e-books
> are not, according to Amazon, sold at all: they are distributed under
> restrictive license terms, similar to downloaded software
[@seringhaus_e-book_2010, 150].

In these conditions, something like a poem or a novel must relinquish its claim
on the universal concrete. In doing that, it ceases to be literature and
becomes instead a device, firmly tied to its given physical affordances.
Reified as a concrete object, no longer lasting and universal, but rather
ephemeral and contingent, it is subject to the whims of the market. The device
now gains the ability to dynamically adapt itself "to the needs of both the
owner and the user." These adaptations could of course take a benign form, of
the kind suggested in "*Remix: Literatur*," where Michel Chaouli imagines a
device akin to a "literature equalizer," empowering readers to "tune" any given
text to their liking [@chaouli_remix_2009]. Don't really like intensifiers?
Just turn the "adverb knob" down! I hold on to the possibility of building such
a device with Chaouli. In the meantime, existing electronic book software and
hardware devices adapt themselves to the reader in less creative ways. Some
prevent simple copy and paste actions. Others can be used to censor and
surveil. For a textual critic, such instability of medium means analysis cannot
be confined to reading for surface meaning alone. How can close or distant
reading practices persist, when the reading device reconfigures a text
dynamically, to fit individual taste, mood, or politics?[^ln3-modern] Or, when
it simply prevents access to some of the content?

[^ln3-modern]: Note that these effects are not limited to contemporary
literature at all. In purchasing a medieval text, the reader still buys not a
text or a work but a device, which, despite the content being out of copyright
protection, may still restrict access to other, protected layers of device
function.

Smart contracts and DMCA are a conspicuous symptom ailing all text gadgets,
which offer only the illusion of flat textuality. Where a literary scholar
could hope to gleam the machinations of ideology from surface representation in
print, the literary device obscures literal flows of governance. Isomorphic
application design makes the situation worse in giving a measure of similarity
between page and screen (the definition of isomorphism), obscuring material
divergence beneath. The condition is not one of ephemeral, immaterial text, but
one of text burdened with hardware and illegible control structure. The task of
the critic becomes then to restore text to its proper mode of being in the
concrete universal: to give it permanence in the world of ideas and to free it
from its arbitrary material constraint. To lay bare the device literally would
mean to make the mechanisms of naked political control visible. For any sort of
reading to commence, one would first need to peel away the DOMs and the
OSIs---today a task fraught with legal consequence.

## Speculative Formalism

In his 1949 paper on "The Genesis and Speed of Telegraph Codes," Frank
Halstead noted that "the practical upper limits of speed will also be limited
by the ability of some human beings to operate a keyboard, until such time as
electrical connection be made direct with the receiver's central nervous
system" [@halstead_genesis_1949, 451].

Speculative formalism involves imagining structures on the cusp of being. The 

The second and more radical idea related to non-representational elements of
communication lies in the possibility of "direct" brain-to-brain interfaces.
F16. Joystick that feels. The electrical system we saw emerge in chapters one
and two can be wired directly in the central nervous system. Not science
fiction. But note that communication is only direct in the sense that the
sender and the receiver of such a message do not have recourse to external
representation. Yet, such communication would still be subject to conditions we
have already explored in the telegraph chapter. Something has to mediate: to
translate between brain impulses and the transmission apparatus. Such "direct"
communication would therefore still be mediated. Can literature survive non
representation. I want to imagine.

Essential for the practices of unencumbered critical thought, control
structures exist in the gaps within the splintered sign. Ultimately, parts of
the inscription that remain invisible affect more than typesetting
characteristics. They shape the very structure of interpretation. The
seemingly innocuous control and formatting layer contains the essence of
machine control. Long a marginal concept in literary theory, formatting is
therefore central to the practice of computational hermeneutics. Far from
mere inconsequential embellishment, formatting governs the interface between
meaning and matter, thought and page. It has the capability to embellish, to
obscure, to censor, to govern, and to emend.

The attached documents illustrate my thesis in practice. In the first image
the reader will find a visual "dotplot" representation of Laurence Sterne's
*The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy*, in plain text (`.txt`) file
format. To produce the image, I use the Helfman's self-similarity dotplot
approach. Dotplots, as Helfman explains, "reveal similarity structures in data
regardless of format and in text and software regardless of language"
[@helfman_dotplot_1996]. They can be used for authorship identification,
plagiarism detection, or to find similarity in genetic material. The
following, is a simple dotplot from Shakespeare:

+----+---+---+---+----+---+---+
|    |to |be |or |not |to |be |
+====+===+===+===+====+===+===+
|to  | • |   |   |    | • |   |
+----+---+---+---+----+---+---+
|be  |   | • |   |    |   | • |
+----+---+---+---+----+---+---+
|or  |   |   | • |    |   |   |
+----+---+---+---+----+---+---+
|not |   |   |   | •  |   |   |
+----+---+---+---+----+---+---+
|to  | • |   |   |    | • |   |
+----+---+---+---+----+---+---+
|be  |   | • |   |    |   | • |
+----+---+---+---+----+---+---+

Table: "Six words of Shakespeare." @helfman_dotplot_1996

When applied to raw, binary data, self-similarity plots can be used to study
data structures, to identify security threats, and to reverse engineer unknown
file types. Note that, at this level, we are not observing patterns of meaning
(as repetition of words or word clusters), but rather structural patterns in
the underlying bit structure. We cannot tell from the image what these
structures mean, only that they have a particular shape. Structure, in this
sense, indicates architecture by human hand. We expect random data to render
into undifferentiated patternless noise. By contrast, file formats, like the
common `.docx` and `.mobi` files, will leave a recognizable signature, even
when corrupted. The sparse topography of the `.txt` file in the first image
indicates a relative paucity in bit types.  Plain text formats are limited to
human-legible UTF-8 or ASCII character sets (used to to encode the `.txt`
file). The square on the lower right likely represents lower case letters,
with the other two squares showing capitals and punctuation.

The second image (Fig. 12) shows the same novel encoded into the popular
Mobipocket (`.mobi`) book format, used to store books on an Amazon Kindle
device, for example. While the plain text signature is still present, other
structures now also come into view. These are not human-legible under closer
examination (using a hex-editor for example) because the data is encrypted. The
plain text characters remaining comprise snippets of code, and some light
header and footer information, identifying the file to reader applications.

To produce the third image (Fig. 13), I encode the plain text version of the
novel into the Portable Document Format (`.pdf`), another commonly circulated
binary format for document storage. In an additional step, I use code injection
techniques outlined in @rahman_getting_2010, @stevens_malicious_2011, and
@maiorca_looking_2013 to introduce a malicious script into the header of the
file. Depending on the version of the reader's Adobe Acrobat Reader, the code
will execute when opening the document, with the potential of causing
significant corruption to the system. The injection is clearly visible in the
image, manifesting as a "cavity" of un-encrypted characters. Steps
could be taken to further mask the malicious script, blending it with the
background encrypted bit structure (shown as speckled noise), which would make
the injection more difficult to detect.

!["Binary file structure I." Laurence Sterne's *Tristram Shandy*, in `.txt` format.
Unaltered.](images/txt.png)

!["Binary file structure II." Laurence Sterne's *Tristram Shandy*, in `.mobi` format.
Unaltered.](images/mobi.png)

!["Binary file structure III." Malicious code injection into the text of Laurence
Sterne's *Tristram Shandy* in `.pdf` format. Cavitation indicating presence of
injected code.](images/pdf.png)

In conclusion, I do not mean to imply that the "closest possible" reading of
this sort, at the circuit and magnetic storage level, will somehow come to
supplement reading at the surface for meaning and representation. Microanalysis
is meant to complement close reading: giving it proper scope in time and space
for its operation. But reading at the surface alone also risks losing sight of
the naked struggle for power and control at the device level. The machine *can*
determine the message when unchecked. In these conditions, reading without
depth may struggle to even locate its object of study, as surface
representations change dynamically, tailoring themselves to fit the reader's
mood, to match the environment, or to please some remote censor. Best, Marcus,
and Sontag are right in treating claims to symptomatic reading with suspicion,
as claims to power. The reader of depth divines secret knowledge, with or
without merit, creating an imbalance of interpretation. Critical reading in all
dimensions must therefore begin with the ethics of mutual legibility. It
succeeds when readers reclaim the underlying material conditions of their
meaning making. The very architects of the "smart" literary device tell us: the
answer to the machine remains in the machine.

<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->
<!-- notes -->

