# Chapter 7: Labor

### 5.1 The Human Assumption (Heidegger + marx)

I can only begin to work of re-inscribing the A more careful analysis of
"microscopically written inscriptions" [@kittler_there_1995] in the in the
passage between typewriters and personal computers, reveals plenty of space for
human agency. Media determine our situation only to the extent that we continue
to treat the everyday transformation of thought into pixel (and thereto into
literary control systems that structure human experience) as mystical and
mystifying black-box mechanism.

Engineer vs. brick levi strauss?

Derrida calls Marx "first thinkers of technics, or even, by far and from afar,
of the tele-technology [@derrida_specters_2006, 213].

Let me make my intentions visa vis Marx perfectly clear. I have no interest in
mobilizing the entire weight of Marxist critique. A whole subset of Marxist
terminology (dictatorship, proletariat, capital) falls outside of my purview
here. Rather, I would like to co-opt Marx's discussion on the fetishism of
commodities and import it, wholesale, to the conversation on algorithms. My
interest lies in the humanism of Marx, whose thought, despite being perpetually
out of time, continues to surprise with penetrating insight.

"All these software mutations and 'new species' of software techniques are
social in a sense that they don't simply come from individual minds or from
some 'essential' properties of a digital computer or network. They come from
software developed by groups of people and marketed to large number of
users"[@manovich_there_2011, 272-273].

"An [algorithm] is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the
social character of men's [agreements] appears to them as an objective
character stamped upon the product of those [agreements]." "There it is a
definite social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the
fantastic form of a relation between things." "The relations connecting the
[agreements] of one individual with that of the rest appear, not as direct
social relations between individuals at work, but as what they really are,
material relations between person and social relations between things."
[@marx_marx-engels_1978, 321] "These quantities vary continually, independently
of the will, foresight and action of the producers.  To them, their own social
action takes the form of the action of objects, which rule the producers
instead of being ruled by them." To strip the "mystical veil," algorithms as
contracts between "freely associated men" [@marx_marx-engels_1978, 327]. "this
automatism outside the head" .Necromancy.

Hijack the whole conversation from the

The subject is back. Unlike natural-language texts where meaning is derived in
conversation between reader and author, algorithms and control codes have
unambigious meaning, that ensure reliable reproduction. The environment is
controlled. The codes are tested. The will is there!

Derrida "If one follows the letter of the text, the critique of the ghost or of
spirits would thus be the critique of a subjective representation and an
abstraction, of what happens in the head, of what comes only out of the head,
that is, of what stays there, in the head, even as it has come out of there,
out of the head, and survives outside the head" [@derrida_specters_2006, 215].

In religion people make their empirical world into an entity that is only
conceived, imagined, that confronts them as something foreign
[@marx_collected_1976, 159].

imagined commodity = algorithm labor = contracts, agreements

Heidegger revealment.

I am able to now finally confront the ghostly apparition present throughout in
the background Much of what today goes by the term new materialism is
materialism in the sense of talking about and privileging a certain idea of
object-oriented consciousness. Some go even as far as to elevate objects to the
status of political and ethical agents, as when.

It is tempting to think that alienation come from phase one. Human displacement
from the hand. Some notion of analog as natural and digital as artificial

The belief that the organic is the chief criterion of what is authentic in art
and life continues, it need hardly be said, to have great force with us, the
more as we become alarmed by the deterioration of the organic environment
[trilling].

The passage between thought and its physical manifestation, whether
intra-cranial, as a configuration of neurons and synapses, or external, as a
note to self or a novel, is an unsolved problem in science. Like the gap
between mind and brain, the distance between thought and text has not yet been
bridged.

What happened to our writing implements? First came the typewriter and
philosophers thought it would ruin humanity. Then, with the computer, software
engineers thought they saw a glimpse of textuality capable of transcendence.
Then came Microsoft Word. And worse yet, the box: the ubiquitous internet
browser text box that just does very little. Ctrl-Copy, Cntrl-Paste.

Containing an argument for text as an interface between human and machine.
Isomorphism. Search. Protocol - interface. What you see is what you get. What
you see is not what you get. Argument for text. Desktop publishing. Stream vs.
Object containers.

What is a well-formed thought? Is being able to communicate one's reasoning
clearly an integral part of clear reasoning? Can one think well, but write
poorly? Or does thinking well in a sense also mean writing well? I don't mean
to ask these questions to start an argument about cognition or rhetoric.
Rather, I would appeal to the intuitive sense of connection between the written
and the mental worlds and to simply note the natural correspondence between the
two. There is a bit of magic in that correspondenceâ€”the kind of magic that
becomes transparent (and disappears from view) through acclimation. Here is a
simple to-do list from my partner. For some moments after reading it, her will
has become my command. My arms and legs move under the spell of her bidding.
For her part, she has ensured that the list reflects what she wants me to do.
That is, it reflects what she wants. And in her absence, the to-do list did
represent her volition accurately. I read it as a testament to her will; I was
able to internalize the instructions; and then I acted on their behalf. We may
say that the to-do list was used to synchronize an aspect of our mental lives.
It was an interface of sorts, which has allowed us to bridge two separate
mental worlds, mediated by a piece of paper. And yet how quickly we discard it!
The interface itself is perhaps too thin and transparent to hold our (critical)
attention.

"A text editor is often the primary interface between a user and the system,
and the program with which most user time is spent. Accordingly, an editor has
to be easy to use, and efficient of the user's time---editing commands have to
'flow off the fingertips.'" [@kernighan_unix_1978, 2117].

Containing an argument for text as an interface between human and machine.
History of combinatorial languages and logic.  Stack as a model of
communication

"Pen is Mightier than a Sword" by Pam A. Mueller and Daniel M. Oppenheimer.

Southall. Interfaces between the designer and the document

It may seem at first a bit odd to put the words "style" and "cognition" in the
same sentence, but the concept of "cognitive style" is well-articulated in the
scientific literature on the psychology of personality. The idea of cognitive
stylistics was developed first by the American followers of Carl Jung, who like
Katharine Cook Briggs and her daughter Isabel Briggs Myers (of the still
ubiquitous Myers-Briggs Type Indicator offered by career placement centers
across the country) were interested in applying insights from
quantitatively-based psychological observation (psychometrics) to problems of
labor and education. In the early 1950s, the idea of "personality type" gave
way to "cognitive style" in the work of psychologists George Klein, Philip
Holzman, Riley Gardner, and Herbert Schlesinger.1 For this new generation of
scholars, the concept meant something like "the individual differences in
adaptive modes of organizing and experiencing the stimulus world."2 That is to
say that people simply have or develop a preference for a particular mode of
thinking about and perceiving the world. Or even simpler: "everyone does it in
his own way."3 Thus, in an early experiment Gardner observes a group of people
categorizing objects by size, shape, and color. Predictably, different people
perceive the differences between size, shape, and color in differing
gradations.4 The converse of this experiment suggests also that certain modes
of material organization favor a particular style of thought. We may assume,
for example, that certain ways of organizing the world attract or "make sense"
to a particular type of person. In the literature on education, the concept is
therefore popular within the discussion of learning styles, by which teachers
are encouraged to present their material in ways accessible to students with
varying preferences for visual, auditory, tactile, or kinesthetic learning.

The hypothesis of cognitive styles underlies a particular belief about the
connection between mental organization and the organization of objects in the
real world. It is what Heidegger called "the correlation between being, word,
gathering, hand, and writing"5 and perhaps what Nietzsche meant when he wrote
that "our writing tools are also working on our thoughts."6 Heidegger in
particular is often cited in this regard. In his meditation on Parmenides,
delivered as a series of lectures during the war at the University of Freiburg,
Heidegger is clearly bothered by what he perceives as the "irruption of the
typewriter into the realm of the world of handwriting."7 Ever in search of
essences, he imagines hand-writing to possess a special kind of magic, denoting
"an original essential nexus, to which the indicating writing-hand belongs." He
continues to say that: [...] in handwriting the relation of Being to man,
namely the word, is inscribed in beings themselves. The origin and the way of
dealing with writing is already in itself a decision about the relation of
Being and of the word to man and consequently a decision about the comportment
of man to beings and about the way both, man and thing, stand in
unconcealedness or are withdrawn from it.8

The typewriter somehow disturbs this idyllic picture, withdrawing "from man the
essential rank of the hand, without man's experiencing this withdrawal
appropriately and recognizing that it has transformed the relation of Being to
his essence."9 In my favorite bit of condescension from the old master,
Heidegger goes as far as to suggest that his readers misunderstand him
precisely because type-setting is so groundless. "The typewriter is a signless
cloud," he writes, "a withdrawing concealment in the midst of its very
obtrusiveness [â€¦] not showing itself to its essence." "Perhaps that is why most
of you, as is proven to me by your reaction, though well-intended, have not
grasped what I have been trying to say."10

What is Heidegger trying to say here? And what precisely is being concealed by
the typewriter? In "The Question Concerning Technology," originally published
in 1954, Heidegger explains that technology is primarily a mode of revealing
truth. To make this point, Heidegger begins with an analysis of a specific
artifactâ€”a silver chalice used for ceremonial rights. Initially, it seems that
the primary purpose of the artifact is to facilitate something, the
administration of ceremonial rites in this case. The cup is an instrument for
something, in other words; it is a means to an end. Another way to put it would
be to say that the ceremony is the cause for the cup's very existence. But
there is more than just causa finalis, as Heidegger puts it. The physical
properties of silver (causa materialis) also constitute a cause, as does the
shape of the cup (causa formalis), and as does the silversmith who has
fashioned the vessel (the silversmith being causa efficiens). In fact the cup's
very instrumentality is grounded in this chain of causation. The cup is an
occasion to bring forth the ceremony; to bring forth a certain property of
silver; to bring forth the water-containing property of the vessel's shape; and
finally to bring forth the craft of the silversmith. The making of the cup is
not mere "handicraft manufacture," Heidegger writes, nor is it "only artistic
and poetical bringing into appearance and concrete imagery," but rather a
"bringing-forth, "poiesis in the highest sense."11

At its best, technology reveals truth. At this point of the essay Heidegger
makes a distinction between traditional technology or "handicraft," and modern,
machine-powered technology.12 Modern technology also reveals, writes Heidegger.
But it does not "unfold into a bringing-forth in the sense of poiesis." Rather
modern technology is a challenge or a provocation [Herausfordern] to nature.
The figure of the natural betrays the extent of Heidegger's romanticism. "The
revealing that is modern technology is a challenging, which puts to nature the
unreasonable demand that it supply energy which can be extracted and stored as
such," writes Heidegger.13 "But does it hold true for the old windmill as
well?" he asks. And answers, No. Its sails do indeed turn in the wind; they are
left entirely to the wind's blowing. But the windmill does not unlock energy
from the air currents in order to store it. In contrast, a tract of land is
challenged in the hauling out of coal and ore. The earth now reveals itself as
a coal mining district, the soil as a mineral deposit. The field that the
peasant formerly cultivated and set in order appears different from how it did
when to set it in order still meant to take care of and to maintain. The work
of the peasant does not challenge the soil of the field. In sowing grain he
places seed in the keeping of the forces of growth and waits over its increase.
[By contrast] agriculture is now the mechanized food industry. Air is now set
upon to yield nitrogen, the earth to yield ore, ore to yield uranium, for
example; uranium set upon to yield atomic energy, which can be released either
for destruction or for peaceful use.14

The passage is remarkable for its apparent prescience of the contemporary
environmental conservation movement, which often implies a similar conservative
romanticism about handicraft technology. Both ideologies contain a particular
notion of "authentic" or "unadulterated" state of nature, which is
"challenged," to use Heidegger's terminology, by the tools of modern
technology. Handicraft, by contrast, is seen as an activity that operates in
harmony with nature, without undue disturbance. This view is of course
historically incorrect. Pre-modern hunting practices and agriculture have often
led to large-scale ecological disturbances: pollution, species extinction, and
deforestation. In this context, the distinction between modern and pre-modern
itself begins to seem arbitrary. The latent romantic naturalism strains under
further scrutiny. The silver chalice, for example, can be seen as the
culmination of a long and destructive process of mining, ore processing,
smelting, and manufacture, which at each stage involves the very opposite of
Heidegger's ideal non-disruptive poiesis.

A more chartable reading of the passage would attempt to place Heidegger's
critique of modern technology in the context of his phenomenology. Heidegger's
phenomenology is a weighty, but well-explored topic, and for this reason I will
limit our discussion to its most generally-known and relevant features. For
Heidegger, our knowledge of the world comes in two flavors: presentness-at-hand
[Vorhandenheit] and readiness-to-hand [Zuhandenheit]. When we think of some
object in the worldâ€”a hammer, to use the famous exampleâ€”we first imagine
something like the formal definition of a hammer in a series of knowable facts
about the object: a hammer is made of metal and wood, we use it to pound nails,
it is man's first tool, and so on. The type of epistemological knowledge about
the world, the knowledge that combines the readily observable properties and
our shared understanding of the object, is called "present-to-hand" in
Heidegger's system. "Ready-to-hand" knowledge by contrast is practical. I know
something about the hammer, but I also have used a hammerâ€”and in using it I
understood the tool in an applied manner. But more than that, in using the
hammer I understand something about the nail. An essential property of the
transition between theoretical and applied knowledge of the world, is the
disappearance of the tool. For Heidegger, the tool literally becomes a kind of
"sight," helping us identify properties of the world that are particularly
well-suited for its application. "Action has its own kind of sight," Heidegger
writes in Being and Time.15 The hammer helps us experience the nail in a
hammering kind-of-a-way. Hammering reveals something about the nail, and by
extension, about metals in general. At the bottom of this experience is man's
relationship to nature itself. All "good" technologies work in that way for
Heidegger. "Technology comes to presence in the realm where revealing an
unconcealment take place, where aletheia, truth, happens," he writes in "The
Question Concerning Technology."16 The plow reveals something about the earth,
just as the windmill reveals something about the air current.

Modern technology reveals too, but it breaks the "natural" phenomenological
experience in two important ways. First, the tool fails to fully disappear into
the experience. I imagine this to be the same kind of a feeling a musician has
when playing an unfamiliar instrument. The instrument "stands in the way" of
the unity between man and music. Second, the modern instrument introduces a
kind of a perceptual bias. It treats nature as a reserve of energy [Bestand]â€”as
a kind of a storehouse, an inventory, or a collection. Whereas the farmer's
plow reveals the earth as fertile ground, the tractor reveals it to be a mere
resource for mechanized agriculture. The earth ceases to be an object of
knowledge, amenable to other ways of knowing. In this way, modern technology
works to "order" or to "enframe" matter, interfering with the very process of
truth-formation. Moreover, just as the earth ceases to be the object of
knowledge, the orderingâ€”or to use the very un-Heideggerian term, the
commodificationâ€”of natural resources threatens to turn the human into a
resource. For Heidegger, modern technology disrupts the status of the human as
a proper subject:

Only to the extent that man for his part is already challenged to exploit the
energies of nature can this revealing which orders happen. If man is
challenged, ordered, to do this, then does not man himself belong even more
originally than nature within the standingâ€“reserve? The current talk about
human resources, about the supply of patients for a clinic, gives evidence of
this. The forester who measures the felled timber in the woods and who to all
appearances walks the forest path in the same way his grandfather did, is today
ordered by the industry that produces commercial woods, whether he knows it or
not. He is made subordinate to the orderability of cellulose, which for its
part challenged forth by the need of paper, which is then delivered to
newspapers and illustrated magazines.

The commodification of both subject and object commodifies phenomenology
itself. One can perceive more than a hint of Marx in this line of critique.  If
the plow reveals something about the earth, the pen reveals something about
language. The relationship between man and language is of a primary importance
to Heidegger. In the realm of language, man stands in relation to being itself.
Heidegger's own discourse often progresses through a series of etymological
reconstructions, which contain an almost mystical sense of reverence for the
veracity of meaning contained in the original, Greek understanding of a given
concept. By similar logic, the hand represents a "pure," unadulterated
relationship of man to language. The hand "contains an essence of the human
being because the word, as the essential region of the hand, is the essential
ground of being human."17 In the metaphoric juxtaposition between word and
ground, the analogy between pen and plow becomes apparent. And just like
mechanized agriculture, mechanized writing "deprives the hand of dignity in the
realm of the written word and degrades the word to a mere means for the traffic
of communication."18 The typewriter commodifies language in other words,
turning it into the "standing reserve" of information. "In mechanized writing
all humans begin to look the same," writes Heidegger.19 Intermedia as
Syncopation between Human, Machine, and Language It has been suggested that
Heidegger's distaste for mechanized writing stemmed from his inability to
type.20 Don Ihde, a contemporary authority on Heidegger's philosophy of
technology, suggests that all new mechanisms go through an awkward stage of
sorts, in which they still feel unfamiliar to us, and therefore disruptive in
the way an unfamiliar instrument is "in the way" of music for a musician. But
with time, these technologies once again become transparent to us, and the link
between man and language is once again restored in the fluent hands of a nimble
typist.21 Such an attempt to "de-romanticize"22 Heidegger's argument cannot
fully diffuse the rhetorical force of his critique. Heidegger's romanticism
continues to exert considerable influence on contemporary thought, particularly
when it comes to the discussion about emerging technology, and especially in
the fields of literary and cultural studies. Perhaps the most visible (in a
sense of well-known and often-cited) example of this trend is Friedrich
Kittler's 1986 Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. In the conclusion of this
book-length study, Kittler brings the Heideggerian rhetoric to its natural
paranoiac crescendo: "A simple feed-back loopâ€”and information machines bypass
humansâ€”their so-called inventors [â€¦] Electronics, a tube monster since
Bletchley Park, replaces discourse, and programmability replaces free will [â€¦]
Under the condition of high technology, literature has nothing more to say. It
ends in cryptograms that defy interpretation and only permit interception." As
evidence for this vision, Kittler submits a letter/poem which resembles a
nonsensically-encoded communiquÃ© addressed to Truman, Roosevelt, Stalin, and
Churchill.23 A more tempered position, along the same Heideggerian lines, was
advanced by Erich Kahler, a prominent American literary critic writing in the
1960s, who saw the history of the avant-garde movements in the 20th century
following a downward trajectory of formal disintegrationâ€”from the initial
purging of sentiment in the nouveau roman, to the dissolution of language in
the final "typographical stage" of literary development.24 Kahler's ultimate
worry was over what he called "the triumph of incoherence," which leads to "the
dissolution of the linguistic form," "the divorce of language from its human
source," and finally, to the destruction of consciousness itself (when
consciousness for him is defined as coherent perception of the world25). "What
started as poetry," writes Kahler, "ends up in typography."26 "Under the
fanfares of thrilling innovations sounding everywhere, from Brazil to Iceland,
literature fades away, not only into graphics, but into motley sound
associations and mechanistic regimentation:" The overwhelming preponderance of
collectivity with its scientific, technological and economic machinery, the
daily flow of new discoveries and inventions that perpetually change aspects
and habits of thought and practice, the increasing incapacity of individual
consciousness to cope with the abstract anarchy of its environment, and its
surrender to a collective consciousness that operates anonymously and diffusely
in our social and intellectual institutionsâ€”all this has shifted the center of
gravity of our world from existential to functional, instrumental, and
mechanical ways of life. At the same time the hypertrophy of functional
rationalization has produced an overcompensating irrationality, reversing to
the bodily concrete or spiraling to the absurd. Hence the products of the
avant-gardes display a strange blend of erratic imaginative vagaries with
technological and pseudo-scientific aspirations. Fragments of unconscious and
sensory experience are in a ghostly manner treated with an exactitude derived
from the rational consciousness and information.27 

I take Kahler's reaction to concrete poetry as an eloquent, if somewhat
misguided, expansion of Heidegger's "typewriters are ruining things" thesis.
The argument is again a restatement of the connection between technology,
language, and consciousnessâ€”a triad that resurfaces every few decades as a
manifestation of our collective technophobic hypochondria.

In my understanding, the practice of concrete poetry stands in diametric
opposition to the thesis advanced by Heidegger, Kittler, and Kahlerâ€”a vision of
literary dissolution under the conditions of high technology. The artifice of
Emmett Williams's "Sometimes" (Figure 4.1) lies in the reinserting of the
writing implement into the protected world of the poetic. The poem is
impossible without the machine. Reading or reciting it is not enough: we are
meant to type, or at least to imagine typing the poem. Classical scansion is
not sufficient either. We must be able to imagine the rhythm of the typewriter:
the sharp hammer-like movement of its type-bars, the clicking of the platern,
the whizzing sound and the bell of the lever-operated carriage return. The
typewriter "thinks" in so far as it suggests a particular styleâ€”of writing,
thinkingâ€”a style that has an impetus, a logic, and a poetry of its own. The
rhythmic impetus of the typewriter pulls the poem along a particular metric
trajectory. The poet disrupts that logic with a correction. The resulting
grapheme, documents the interruption, and in the process pulls the material
world into the literary. The smudge of the ribbon, the rejected versions of the
poem, the mark of the proofreader, and yes the typewriter itselfâ€”all of these
"extra-literary" elements of the creative process are elevated to the status of
the poetic. Another way to describe the dynamic between literature and
technology in this case, would be to say that the concretist aesthetic
appropriates the extra-functional elements of the writing mechanism. What
initially seems a mere artifact of literary production becomes art. Literature
thus taints technology, stripping away the pretense of pure functionalism.
Under the condition of the literary, to reverse Kittler here, technology gains
a new voice. Nothing is determined about the encounter between human, machine,
and language. Each element of this triad contains a mere suggestion of rhythm
and pace. The resulting symphony is a syncopation of all three elements. There
is of course nothing particularly modern about his dynamic. The printing press
introduced a particular poetics into the language as well. It is just that
after a time, the cognitive style of the printing press has become transparent
to us, particularly after publishing had congealed into a relatively stable
system of production and distribution. The advent of the typewriter, of desktop
publishing, and of distributed, online models of publication destabilizes the
established stylistics. With each of these advancements we worry anew about the
impact of technology on our way of thinkingâ€”a concern that goes back to the
introduction of writing itself, as in Plato's Phaedrus.

The history of concrete poetry can be seen as the culmination of one such
shift, spurred on by the transference of type-setting from the printer to the
author. This dynamic may explain the simultaneous eruption of concrete poetry
across multiple literary traditions. "The confused geography of its beginnings
reflects the universality of its roots," Williams writes.28 He then suggests
the following signposts upon this landscape: the "constellation" poetry of
Eugene Gomerenger; the posters of Carlo Belloli and F.T. Marinetti; the
Noigandres poets of Sao Paulo; the work of the Danish poet Oyvin Fahlstrom; the
ideagrams of Dieter Roth; the sound-poetry experiments of the East German poet
Carlfriedrich Claus; the collaborative work of the Vienna composer Gerhard
Ruhm, architecht Friedrich Achleitner, a jazz musician Oswald Weiner, and the
poets H.C. Atmann and Konrad Bayer in the early fifties; and finally Williams's
own work with the Darmstadt Circle, which included the Kitasano Katue of Japan
and the German dramaturgist Claus Bremer.29 To this topography we could add an
increasingly long list of "intermedial" work by Vladimir Mayakovsky and
Guillame Apollinaire in the early 1920s, several of Lewis Carroll's poetic
experiments, and much work from non-western traditions, in alphabets that have
always contained a strong visual element (Chinese, Arabic, etc).  In this
light, concrete poetry can be seen as the culmination of a particular
techno-cognitive styleâ€”a full-blown artistic movement which peaks at the
eclipse of the typewriter age. The cognitive style of concrete poetry, if one
may speak of such a thing, is one of cross-modal perception. It literally
attempts to engage areas of the brain not normally affected by passive reading.
Artists associated with Fluxus and concrete poetry were committed to the
development of what they called intermedia. In his 1966 "Statement on
Intermedia," Dick Higgins, the Cambridge-born poet, composer, and publisher,
writes: For the last ten years or so, artists have changed their media to suit
this situation, to the point where the media have broken down in their
traditional forms, and have become merely puristic points of reference. The
idea has arisen, as if by spontaneous combustion throughout the entire world,
that these points are arbitrary and only useful as critical tools, in saying
that such-and-such a work is basically musical, but also poetry. This is the
intermedial [sic] approach, to emphasize the dialectic between the media. A
composer is a dead man unless he composes for all the media and for his
world.30 The spontaneous invention of this artistic program in Switzerland,
Italy, Argentina, Germany, and the United States31 is contemporaneous with the
turn to cross-modal perception studies in post-war psychology. At the core of
this shared program is a new understanding of cognitive stylistics. As Marshal
McLuhan, himself associated with the Fluxus movement, wrote in his 1967
Verbi-Voco-Visual Explorations, "the physics of typographic lineality have
dominated our perception."32 But, as Kahler notes in his anti-concretist
polemic, this approach has also erased the boundaries between the
socially-constructed categories that separate the literary from the visual and
auditory arts. With that expansion come the loss of specificity and the
dissolution of the protective barriers that usually separate genre and medium.
Fluxus could thus be viewed as a type of cognitive calisthenics, designed to
loosen the rigidity of fixed mental perceptionâ€”a mental rigidity reinforced by
the rigidity in cultural categories (epistemology).  



## 2.5 Marx upside down

It is this last and still current moment of historical development that is
least theorized. A dominant tradition in the history of the human sciences
follows Louis Althusser and Michel Foucault (and, to a lesser extent, Jacques
Derrida)[^ln1-derr] in analyzing mechanisms of structure and control in terms
of ideology, discourse, and representation. Where for Althusser "every science
is a science of ideology,"[^ln1-alt] Foucault posits his archeology of the
human sciences on the level of "positive unconscious," revealing unspoken
"rules" that govern the formation of "theories, concepts, and objects of study"
on the level of "scientific representation" [@foucault_order_1994, xi].

There are a number of theoretical niceties here (that the reader may skip, if
not interested in the history of Marxist thought). For example, the concept of
ideology, in the orthodox Marxist schema of things, exists as a "political
superstructure [...] to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness." In the Marxist model, ideology floats *above* the material
base---the dominant mode of production---that "determines the general character
of the social, political and spiritual processes of life"
[@marx_contribution_1904, 11]. Althusser's influential contribution to this
world view was to insist that ideology, although secondary to the mode of
production, nevertheless assures its continual reproduction as a means of
continuing subjugation and political control. Simply put, for Althusser, the
ideological apparatus of the modern capitalist state ends up being "installed
in the dominant [social] position" [@althusser_lenin_2001, 85-127]. In a
similar (although not equivalent) rhetorical move, Foucault envisions that
beneath the "epistemological level" of human activity there exists an
"archaeological layer," where representation "governs the mode of being of
language, individuals, nature, and need itself" [@foucault_order_1994, 209].
Ideology and representation, once determined, now determine. The rhetorical
jujitsu inverts Hegel yet again, to put Marx back on his head.[^ln1-flip] My
short history of the universal Turing machine runs counter to this top-heavy
tradition of reading Marx in the inverse. As a device, the Turing machine fuses
control and communication. Control is meant here bluntly, as physical circuit
control, at the level of the mechanism and not at the attenuated level of
ideology or representation.


## Labor, Energy

Literature hides the labor of readers and writers. In another sense, there is
also the concealment of raw, physical energy that "goes into the word." The
work it takes to get a rock up a mountain gives it potential energy to roll
back down. By definition, potential energy relates to the possibility of "work
done." The rock can pull something up the hill as it is falling down, for
example. What of the energy that went into the writing of these sentences? I
spent a few *joules* compressing the springs under my keyboard. Many more went
into my laptop as electric current. Why? To overcome matter's passive impedance
of advancing change. To preserve and to communicate this message *amperes*, the
unit of electrical flow, struggled with *ohms*, the unit of electrical
resistance.

There is energy too in the librarian's effort to archive a book, in the
churning of a search engine to make it accessible to a reading public, and in
the work of a truck driver who ferries information by road. The sum of these
energies, which seem significant now in their accumulation, went into the
writing of these words. Much of it dissipated as heat and light. And some of
it---just a small part---left an imprint somewhere. It left a trace of ink on a
page, magnetized a piece of tape, or shifted the configuration of the floating
gate buried within the solid state drive. Finally, the potential energy
remaining within the word began a chain of electrical reactions in the reader's
brain. The mental effort or reading and writing amounts to "knowledge
work."[@liu_laws_2004] Ultimately, writing serves to connect the electrical
circuitry of at least two neurological systems. Reading leaves the brain in a
different state than before. Writing, in this light, involves the transmission
of neural activity between hosts. When considered as a physical process,
literature is a type of electroencephalography (EEG), or electric head writing.

![The place of linguistic structure among "the facts of language". Saussure's communication circuit [@saussure_course_1986, 11].](images/saussure.jpg)

Ferdinand de Saussure's paradigmatic circuit model of communication (pictured
here) follows from head to head. In *Plain Text*, I will complicate that
picture by tracing the passage of thought further from *inscription* to a
*device*. At each stage of the passage, we will observe the process of encoding
and decoding, by which one type of substance---a thought---is converted into
another type: a word or the oscillation of an electrical current. I will
present here a type of a materialist reading practice, which pays attention to
the physical properties of the communication act. I will give that practice a
name---microanalysis---and a purpose: to uncover the energy gained or lost in
the transformation from code to code and from medium to medium.

I am concerned with energy because too often our foundational models of reading
and interpretation take the text as a fixed given. Even in our most
destabilizing readings, like Jacques Derrida's "Plato's Pharmacy", the
materiality of the text is assumed to persevere. "We will take off here from
the *Phaedrus*," Derrida writes [@derrida_dissemination_1981, 66]. "The reader
can count the lines" at the "precisely calculated center of the dialogue"
[@derrida_dissemination_1981, 67]. Plato's dialog has for Derrida a definite
beginning, middle, and end. Derrida asks the reader "to return to the text,"
even when the text "remains forever imperceptible"
[@derrida_dissemination_1981, 63 & 95].[^ln1-translate] When Derrida talks in
this usual way of a literary scholar, he uses the word "text" in two distinct
ways: one, as an abstract mental construct---the one that is "forever
imperceptible," and the physical one, which has a definite and stable
topography---the one to which we return with confidence.

In the vision of post-structural poetics, the text in the abstract resembles
the quicksand of unstable signifies. In other words, one can define a word only
in relation to other words. In this way, Derrida describes texts as
"dissimulation of the woven texture," "a web that envelops a web," and "an
organism, indefinitely regenerating its own tissue behind the cutting trace,
the decision of each reading" [@derrida_dissemination_1981, 63]. In *Plain
Text*, I want to further challenge the stability of the text as a physical
artifact. The literary device reconfigures the text dynamically in the process
of reading. Because the text is no longer fixed into a stable medium, we must
do away with page numbers, for example. Pagination changes according to the
size of the device. More intrusively, the reader cannot rely on finding the
same text upon return. The writer, the book seller, or the censor have the
technological capacity to alter the text in real time, even as the book rests
in hand or on a shelf.


IBM Format

By 1932 the ITU documents list two new standards, International Telegraphic
Alphabet No. 1 (ITA-1) and International Telegraphic Alphabet No. 2 (ITA-2).
The ITA formats, like the Baudot, represented latin characthers in a system of
fixed-lenght "bit" codes, For example, in ITA-1 the letter "A" and the number
"1" are both represented by `-++++`; "X" and "," by `+-++-`, and the "error"
code by `+++--` [@itu_telegraph_1932, 34]. Because the devices are not
synchronized, the pause between each transmitted character can vary in length.
For this reason ITA-2 includes two extra bits for indicating "start" and stop"
elements. The letter "A" and a hyphen in ITA-2 would be encoded as `0110001`,
where ones and zeros represent the absence and the presence of
current[@itu_telegraph_1932, 36].

By the 1960, multiple competing character encodings existed in the United
States and globally.

ASCII.
Plain text in Unix. Human readability. TROFF.

Further separation. On benefits of computer-aided document preparation. "The
style or format of the document can be decoupled from its content; the only
format control information that need be embedded is that describing textual
categories and boundaries, such as titles, section headings, paragraphs, and
the like [@kernighan_unix_1978, 2116]

Plain and fancy Text Unix system. What you see is not what you get. What is
plain text. Unix ideas of plain text. ASCII. From form and content to content,
semantic markup, and typesetting. Semantic markup as part of the
extra-linguistic meaning making.

http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr29/ The concept of Grapheme Clusters.

Semantic markup is interesting because it contains both material and ideal. The
way textuality is encoded mediates between idea and matter. Mediation. Visible
form and hidden form.

The theory of preaching. Lectures on homiletics (1892). Plain text vs. obscure
text.o

John Charles Ryle
Expository Thoughts on the Gospels: For Family and Private Use. With the ...

"One plain text is worth a thousand arguments."

Words: Their Use and Abuse
Say plain things in a plain way.

Time and truth reconciling the moral and religious world to Shakespeare: the
 By B. S. Naylor
"Thus it is, that the plain text, the obvious meaning, of Shakespeare, is
dostorted by Commentators and beclouded by Illustrators" (p64)

"One plain text is worth a thousand"

Signal Book, United States Army: 1916

## 5.3 Smart Contracts (A Legal Interlude)

Legal fictions rise to veil the emerging affordances of
textual technology.

Exposing the Document Object Model that governs the production of text through
contemporary reading and writing devices gives the question of surface and
depth yet another connotation. What lies beneath the text? We are accustomed to
thinking about document structure metaphorically and answer in accord: meaning,
narrative, representation, order, discourse, or ideology. Interpretation, at
that level of analysis, happens in the head, which physically limits the
possibility of depth to personal introspection, magnetic resonance imaging, or,
at best, to an archive of extant reader responses (which in themselves need
further interpretation).

Introducing the literary device as machine, gadget, or appliance into the
formula suggests another, more literal answer. Beneath a text one finds cloth
and wood pulp and, increasingly, also glass, plastic, liquid crystal, copper,
laminates, and silicone.

The move between paper and composite device carries with it a profound shift in
the physical affordances of the deep structure supporting all subsequent,
higher-order, surface-level representations of textuality. Not much space
separates ink from paper. There, textuality lies flat, in two dimensions. What
you see is truly what you get. Not so on the screen connected to other screens.
Networked and time-shared textuality extends into the third dimension, away
from the reader and deep into the bowels of the machine. The Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) reference model of communication[^ln3-osi] describes no
less than seven layers: from the Application Layer, concerned with the
semantics of application ("all services directly comprehensible to the user
[@miller_iso_1981, 285] to the Physical Layer, providing the "mechanical,
electrical, functional, and procedural characteristics" of communication
[@ncs_open_1981; @ncs_national_1988; @day_revised_1995].[^ln3-layers] These
protocols further envelop a document already thickly stratified by the
Document Object Model.[^ln3-domlayer]

[^ln3-domlayer]: The DOM technically exists at the application layer of the OSI
model.

![A zoomed out view of the connected OSI model. Single node structure on the
left. Connected devices on the right. The user has access through the top-most
(application) level, outermost to the network [@piatkowski_iso-ansi_1980,
114-15].](images/osi.png)

These are the same layers that Alexander Galloway unites in a system of what he
calls decentralized and distributed control [@galloway_protocol_2006, 28-54].
It is distributed to be sure, although to what extent decentralized is a matter
of some debate. Like a good soldier, each device in the pictured network
internalizes dozens if not hundreds of protocols that enable the system to
function seamlessly as a whole (in the way, for example, that your machine can
at one moment connect to one wireless access point, and at another moment to
another, with minimal loss of connectivity). Yet, OSI protocols and the DOM are
also densely consolidated. They are, for example, legislated by specific
international governing bodies[^ln3-w3c], susceptible to the usual political
pitfalls of pan-global consortia.

Once bifurcated between storage and screen, the inscription travels along a
"pipeline" of protocols, undergoing a set of arbitrary transformations
throughout. On one device, that pipeline may extend just a few inches,
connecting disk storage and output display. On a network device that pipeline
can stretch across continents, spanning widely divergent regions of legal and
administrative control. The book you are reading here may be stored in another
state or country. Whatever the case may be, the subject encounters the
"protocol stack" from without, on the periphery of the onion-like network. When
paging through an electronic book (usually an OSI-compliant device displaying
DOM-structured files), for example, the reader has access only to the outputs
emanating from the application layer, and, at that, only at the exposed
"window" level of the DOM. The perceived "content" constitutes a small fraction
of the underlying "formal" topology. What you see is far less than what you
get.

[^ln3-w3c]: The International Standards Organization (ISO) in the case of OSI,
the Internet Engineering Task Force in the case of TCP/IP, and the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) in the case of the DOM.

The application layer stops at the subject. Access to the layers intrinsic to
device operation (and consequently to analysis) are sometimes "merely" obscured
and sometimes made illicit outright, as is arguably the case with U.S. Code,
Title 17, Chapter 12, Ã‚Â§1201, titled "Circumvention of copyright protection
systems" and passed as part of the "Digital Millennium Copyright Act" (DMCA) in
1998. A literary scholar may be familiar with some provisions of American
copyright law governing text as surface representation: US Code, Title 17
extends "exclusive rights" to "copyright owners" of "literary works." The
rights include the ability to "reproduce," "to prepare derivative works," "to
distribute copies," and "to perform and to display publicly" (17.1.106).
Surface representation is further subject to professional rules of conduct,
embodied in practices of quotation, citation, and attribution (or lack thereof,
as plagiarism).

In practice, the easy reproducibility of digital text (and image) has served to
erode the efficacy of copyright restrictions as a system of laws and
regulations. The work of art in the age of digital reproduction has lost much
of its already tenuous hold on the material substratum.[^ln3-illusion] Copy
technologies from photocopiers, to desktop printers, to cheap magnetic storage
and peer-to-peer file sharing networks reduce the price of copying and
dissemination to near frictionless levels. The response from the film, game,
music, and publishing industries has been to transpose mechanisms of copyright
enforcement from legal down to the infrastructural levels of enforcement, as
software and hardware: from Code to code. In the words of Charles Clark, the
late British publisher and prominent copyright attorney, "the answer to the
machine is in the machine [@clark_copyright_1996, 81-82]"---by which he meant
that copyright enforcement should be taken up on the device level by the
International Standards Organization, the very body responsible for the DOM and
the OSI communication protocol stack [@clark_copyright_1996, 84].

As an example of how that might work, Clark cites the Copyright in Transmitted
Electronic Data Report (CITED), which suggests building "a tamper proof
software module which acts rather like indestructible tachometers installed on
long-distance coaches and lorries, recording everything that happens to the
copyrighted or commercially valuable material [...] The basic idea is to link
the 'valuable material' of intellectual property to a specific piece of
software and hardware" [@consortium_c.i.t.e.d._1994; @clark_copyright_1996,
83-84].

The emergence of embedded contractual enforcement at the level of the device
can be subsumed under the broader idea of "smart contracts." In his seminal
article on "Formalizing and Securing Relationships in Public Networks," Nick
Szabo explains that "smart contracts combine protocols, user interfaces, and
promises expressed via those interfaces to formalize and secure relationships
over computer networks" [@szabo_formalizing_1997]. Clark, CITED, and Szabo were
instrumental in the rise of smart contracts in the 1990s in an attempt to
redress the fading efficacy of legal copyright protections.[^ln3-smart] "Method
and System for Managing a Data Object so as to Comply with Predetermined
Conditions for Usage" (US5845281, issued in 1998) can be instructive in this
regard. Greg Benson and Gregory H. Urich, both of Sweden, write:

> The data object owner may want to have permanent secure control over how,
when, where, and by whom his property is used. Furthermore, he may want to
define different rules of engagement for different types of users and different
type of security depending on the value of particular objects. The rules
defined by him shall govern the automated operations enabled by data services
and networking. The owner may also sell composite objects with different rules
governing each constituent objects. Thus, it is necessary to be able to
implement variable and extensible control.

The data object, in this case, stands for any media content, from books to
music, video, and software. Rather then legislating rules for copying and
distributing media, the inventors suggest that the medium itself should contain
a control layer that would "comply with predetermined conditions of usage," in
a way that can be "universally adapted to the needs of both the owner and the
user of the data object" [@benson_method_1998, 2:55].

!["Concatenated control data and AVI file in memory"
[@benson_method_1998].](images/avi-control.png)

!["Concatenated and encrypted control data and AVI file in memory"
[@benson_method_1998].](images/avi-control2.png)

The associated schematics (pictured here) show data and control codes
"concatenated" into the same underlying data structure (in this case, AVI media
container format). The seemingly innocuous "text control" layer of the 1960s,
used to specify formatting and visual style, was now extended to carry
mechanisms for legal control, tied to specific legislation.

The idea of smart contracts contains a notable artifact of implementation,
relevant to our discussion on surface reading. To the extent that control codes
are legible to the interpreter, they are also open to "abuse and
circumvention." For this reason, encryption plays a key part in the smart
contracts system. Once intertwined, data and control must be encrypted to
prevent "unauthorized access." This brings us to the glaring problem at the
very heart of smart contract implementation. The spirit of contractual law by
its very nature demands *explicit* consent. In the language of English common
law, contracts involve promises as "manifestation of intention," which "adopt
an external or objective standard for interpreting conduct
[@american_law_institute_restatement_1973, Ã‚Â§1-2.]" The key words in this
passage are "external," "objective," and "interpretation."

By contrast, smart contracts, as described in the patent archive, must rely on
encrypted---that is, not human-legible---forms of tacit compliance: neither
external, objective, nor available for interpretation. The idea of encrypted
consent stands in stark opposition to a tradition of contract law that relies
on models of consent that involve expressed, mutual, explicit, and uncoerced
forms of acquiescence. Even if smart contracts were to be accompanied by
legible documentation (as Terms of Service, for example), the device user would
be compelled to blindly trust in the correspondence between the expressed
letter and the implicit mechanism of the document---the implementation still
enacted beyond scrutiny, as hidden, encrypted, and purposefully illegible
script.

Moreover, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) stipulates that "no
person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls
access to a work protected under this title (17.1201.a.1.A)." The letter of the
law further specifies that to "circumvent a technological measure," in this
case, means "to descramble a scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or
otherwise to avoid, bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a technological
measure, without the authority of the copyright owner (17.1201.a.3.A)." A
technological measure that "effectively controls access" is further defined as
a measure that "in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the
application of information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of
the copyright owner, to gain access to the work (17.1201.a.3.B)." For a
literary scholar, that means that, when encountering a text on a digital
device, reading sometimes *must* limit itself to surface phenomena. An attempt
at reading for depth---to discover the implemented terms of a smart contract,
for example---may carry with it a set of official (even criminal)
sanctions.[^ln3-fairuse]

The short history of DMCA "anti-circumvention" provisions is already littered
with ambiguous case law, that the Electronic Frontiers Foundation believes to
have the effect of "stifling a wide range of legitimate activities," "chilling
free expression and academic research," "jeopardizing fair use," and "impeding
innovation [@von_lohmann_unintended_2010]." Several incidents stand out as
particularly relevant to the study of texts and literature. One, a security
researcher exploring the activity of censorship filters on public library
computers was threatened and forced to seek DMCA exemption from the Librarian
of Congress [@fry_circumventing_2009]. Two, a Russian programmer speaking at a
security conference was jailed and detained for several months for developing
software that converts Adobe electronic book files into `.pdf` format, in a
process that could potentially remove embedded digital rights management
protections [@ferullo_major_2004; @mueller_reinventing_2004;
@postigo_information_2010]. Finally, in 2005 Agfa Monotype Corporation took
Adobe Systems to court in a dispute over the Adobe Acrobat "Free Text" tool,
which allowed users to "change text annotations using Plaintiff's TrueType
fonts" without a license [@_agfa_2005; @lipton_c_2009;
@von_lohmann_unintended_2010]. If they become precedent, any of these cases
could conceivably
be used to physically limit the efficacy of reading, close and distant.

[^ln3-fairuse]: DMCA 1201 provides for a number of complicated exemptions,
which may, under some interpretations, sanction limited use for academic
purposes. See @liu_dmca_2003; @ku_critique_2004; @herman_catch_2005;
@armstrong_digital_2006.

The impact of DMCA and smart contracts on the practices of reading, writing,
and
literary analysis is potentially immense. In the language of the DMCA, the
electronic book is not a book at all, but a "data object," in which the modest
copyright symbol gives way to "control layers [@fischer_digital_2003]." An
essay in the *Yale Journal of Law & Technology* explains it this way:

> While e-books and their print counterparts embody essentially identical
> content, from a transactional standpoint they differ considerably. Books are
> tangible goods that can be owned, sold, and passed on without express
> limitation--the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) governs their sale, while
> copyright law protects their content. But despite appearances, Kindle e-books
> are not, according to Amazon, sold at all: they are distributed under
> restrictive license terms, similar to downloaded software
[@seringhaus_e-book_2010, 150].

In these conditions, something like a poem or a novel must relinquish its claim
on the universal concrete. In doing that, it ceases to be literature and
becomes instead a device, firmly tied to its given physical affordances.
Reified as a concrete object, no longer lasting and universal, but rather
ephemeral and contingent, it is subject to the whims of the market. The device
now gains the ability to dynamically adapt itself "to the needs of both the
owner and the user." These adaptations could of course take a benign form, of
the kind suggested in "*Remix: Literatur*," where Michel Chaouli imagines a
device akin to a "literature equalizer," empowering readers to "tune" any given
text to their liking [@chaouli_remix_2009]. Don't really like intensifiers?
Just turn the "adverb knob" down! I hold on to the possibility of building such
a device with Chaouli. In the meantime, existing electronic book software and
hardware devices adapt themselves to the reader in less creative ways. Some
prevent simple copy and paste actions. Others can be used to censor and
surveil. For a textual critic, such instability of medium means analysis cannot
be confined to reading for surface meaning alone. How can close or distant
reading practices persist, when the reading device reconfigures a text
dynamically, to fit individual taste, mood, or politics?[^ln3-modern] Or, when
it simply prevents access to some of the content?

[^ln3-modern]: Note that these effects are not limited to contemporary
literature at all. In purchasing a medieval text, the reader still buys not a
text or a work but a device, which, despite the content being out of copyright
protection, may still restrict access to other, protected layers of device
function.

Smart contracts and DMCA are a conspicuous symptom ailing all text gadgets,
which offer only the illusion of flat textuality. Where a literary scholar
could hope to gleam the machinations of ideology from surface representation in
print, the literary device obscures literal flows of governance. Isomorphic
application design makes the situation worse in giving a measure of similarity
between page and screen (the definition of isomorphism), obscuring material
divergence beneath. The condition is not one of ephemeral, immaterial text, but
one of text burdened with hardware and illegible control structure. The task of
the critic becomes then to restore text to its proper mode of being in the
concrete universal: to give it permanence in the world of ideas and to free it
from its arbitrary material constraint. To lay bare the device literally would
mean to make the mechanisms of naked political control visible. For any sort of
reading to commence, one would first need to peel away the DOMs and the
OSIs---today a task fraught with legal consequence.

[^ln1-dirt]: Think of text as substance and literature as surface. The first is
like dirt where the second is gound. We play with one on top of the other.


[^ln1-denning]: These stages correspond roughly to the "three generations of
electronic computing" outlined in Peter Denning's "theory of operating systems"
[@denning_third_1971].

RETURN TO MORENO

Colonized by technology. Fanon.

Need for digital migration. Self displacement.

In an ASCII-rendered plain text file, byte count corresponds to character
count.[^ln-char] Let these words soak in for a moment. I will spend the rest of
the book unpacking this idea. We will have to come to terms with what "plain
text," "ASCII," and "bytes" really represent. But for now, a common-sense
understanding of the terms should be enough to form the intuition that texts
and characters are units of meaning that make sense to humans; and that bytes,
by contrast, "make sense" for machines. Remarkably, the two modes of
meaning-making gain a measure of equivalence under the singular condition of
plain text (and even then, not always, and with many caveats).[^ln-human],
[^ln-meaning]

Laws are created to mitigate the new affordances. I will spend much of it at
the work of "teasing apart" the layers obscuring the underlying structure of
the textual device, using historical sources, direct observation, and tools
normally reserved for reverse-engineering of data objects.[^ln5-mechanisms]

## Arendt and Fanon

