# Acknowledgements

The book's faults, to quote Will Durant, are all mine. Its strengths, however,
derive from the support of a community.

The project could not have been possible without the generous support of
Harvard's Comparative Literature department. Its publication was, in fact,
subsidized in part by Harvard Studies in Comparative Literature. Initial
sketches of the book appeared in conversation with Aleksey Berg, Jacob Emory,
Elena Fratto, Natalia and Ilya Kun Anders Engberg-Pedersen, Guy Smoot, Simos
Zenios, and many others who made Dana-Palmer House their home away from home.
The reader will recognize the influence of Svetlana Boym, Peter Gallison,
Richard Moran, Elaine Scarry, William Todd, and Roberto Mangabeira Unger.

A fellowship from the Berkman Center for Internet and Society gave me the time
and means to develop a deep research archive. I would like to thank Yochai
Benkler, Urs Gasser, John Palfrey, Rebecca Tabasky, Jonathan Zittrain, and
especially Jeffery Schnapp for their support. Members of the Cooperation Group
in particular had a profound, if not an obvious, intellectual impact on my
work. Echoes of discussions with Mayo Fuster, Jerome Hergueux, Benjamin Mako
Hill, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, and Aaron Shaw will be found on the pages of
every chapter.

The book came to fruition at Columbia University. Junior colleagues Ratik
Asokan, Emily Fuhrman, Jessica Hallock, Tobias Pester, Phil Polefrone, and
Zachary Roberts helped copyedit and gave insightful feedback. Senior
colleagues Sarah Cole, Nick Dames, Michael Golston, Stathis Gourgouris,
Marianne Hirsch, Jean Howard, Matt Jones, Sharon Marcus, Edward Mendelson,
Frances Negrón-Muntaner Bruce Robbins, and Gayatri Spivak had a hand in
individual chapters. The book became stronger with their guidance. Kaiama
Glover, Marguerite Holloway, Bernard Harcourt, Matt Hart, Lydia Liu, Anupama
Rao, Jesús R. Velasco, and Bill Worthen offered invaluable advice. Columbia's
Comparative Media University Seminar provided an important forum for several
of the book's chapters, involving Stefan Andriopoulos, Noam Elcott, Brian
Larkin, Reinhold Martin, Rosalind C.  Morris, and Felicity Scott, among
others. Columbia University Summer Grant Program in the Humanities and the
Lenfest Junior Faculty Development Grant gave support in the concluding stages
of manuscript preparation. Members of the Experimental Methods Group, Alex
Gil, Susanna Allés Torrent, and Grant Wythoff gave feedback and support.

Manan Ahmed and Durba Mitra, both members of our co-presence writing group,
deserve a special mention. The last year-and-a-half of the book's development
happened in almost daily communication with them. Ahmed's *A Book of Conquest:
The Chachnama and Muslim Origins in South Asia* forthcoming from Harvard
University Press and Mitra's "Indian Sex Life: Women and the New Science of
Society" were at various stages of development at the same time. Their warmth,
humor, patience, and intelligence reflects on every page.

Matt Gold of CUNY and Jentery Sayers at University of Victoria both assigned
early drafts of individual chapters. The experience was immensely helpful in
imagining my audience.

Stanford. 
Siddhartha Lokanandi. Barbara Herrnstein Smith. Johanna Drucker.
Matthew Fuller, Ray Siemens, and other anonymous reviewers.

Ann Kay (Proofreader)
Emily-Jane Cohen
Alex Gil.

## Other Faculty

    Raja Adal
    Janet Vertesi

    Trevor Jockims
    Yoora Yi Tenen
