---
title: Algorithmic Imagination
author: Dennis Tenen
---

## Introduction

### Pitch
History of computation. Lull (universal language) > Leibniz (binary code) > Boole (logic) > Church (logic gates) > Turing (universal machine) > cloud computing (platform as service)
A selective history of a sustained idea. The mystical roots of computation.

### Audience
### Method
Intellectual history. Don't want to use fancy terms like "genealogy" or "archeology" because these don't do justice to the actual practice of genealogy or archeology. 

## Structure
More or less chronological with many digressions.

## Combinatorial Poetics (Algorithm)
We can now conclude the detour into system theory and return to our initial question, but in a much more limited, albeit more productive form: can a text replenish itself? Can it bloom? Can it reproduce? We are beginning to "zoom in" from viewing literature as a system to considering the autopoietic potential of a single text. But the question still seems somewhat odd to me, having again the flavor of an anthropomorphic (or at least biomorphic) metaphor. Can this inanimate object—a text—enact or want to enact anything on its own? Or are we simply making yet another metaphor that attributes volitional characteristics to an inanimate object? To put it another way: do we imagine a text as a type of a tool, or is it something more—something capable of containing objectives beyond the authorial intent? A tool—take a needle for example—is quite passive in this regard. I can poke my neighbor with a needle, and he could say that it was the needle that poked him. But clearly it was I who actively meant to do the poking, and not the needle. The action may have unintended consequences of course: I poked maliciously, but as a result, the neighbor was rid of his headache. Still, we must say that the needle in this case was simply an instrument of my volition. Left to its own devices, the needle "does" nothing. It has no creative or generative potential, we might say. What would it take for us to begin considering the creative or generative potential of an inanimate object? To put it another way: is a text something like a needle, or is it something more than simply a tool or a thing? 

Another tradition of asking this kind of questions is distilled in John Searle's seminal "Chinese Room" thought experiment, which first appeared as an article on the pages of Behavioral and Brain Sciences in 1980.1 Searle's concern in this thought experiment was with artificial intelligence, but in a fashion typical to the discussion (see the previous chapter on Alan Turing and Ludwig Wittgenstein), the readers were asked to test their intuitions against a distinctly discursive apparatus. Imagine being locked in a room with "several baskets full of Chinese symbols," writes Searle. You do not understand a word of Chinese but you are given something like a rulebook, or a giant look-up table (in your language), which you can use to reference the appropriate response to anything that may be asked of you in Chinese:
The rules specify the manipulations of the symbols purely formally, in terms of their syntax, not their semantics [...] Suppose that unknown to you the symbols passed into the room are called "questions" by the people outside the room, and the symbols you pass back out of the room are called "answers." Suppose furthermore, that the programmers are so good at designing the programs, and that you are so good at manipulating the symbols, that very soon your answers are indistinguishable from those of a native Chinese speaker.2
 
And so you sit there, in what is essentially a black box, blindly sorting incomprehensible (to you) symbols, passing and receiving some sort of cards through a slot in the wall (or a similar contraption). To the person outside of this box, it looks as if the room can speak Chinese. But, you of course know that you do not speak the language. Your function within this system is purely mechanical—the point of the experiment being to show that the formal manipulation of symbols does not rise to anything that we may reasonably recognize as speaking or understanding a particular language. Knowing Chinese, according to Searle, requires the appropriate intentional mental state. Moreover, for Searle such mental states are purely biological phenomena, and a property of very particular wetware, just as are "growth, reproduction, the secretion of bile, and digestion."3 Thus, the question of attributing intentional states to essentially algorithmic systems for him hinges on an a priori distinction between living and non-living organisms. 
    We arrive then at the same stumbling block that we hit in our discussion of autopoiesis. In an attempt to define an essential property of a living (thinking, self-reflexive, talking) system, we are confronted with the erasure of the very boundaries that we were trying to establish. Searle, along with the critics of autopoiesis applied to social systems, beg the question by simply insisting on the distinction between wetware and hardware, arguing that properties such as thought, language fluency, and recursive self-regeneration, are exclusive properties human, or at least, biological systems. The distinction between wetware and hardware may well be worth preserving, even when we cannot quite come to an agreement on its formal definition. I am intentionally not taking a clearly defined side in this recurring debate in order to avoid the argument about definitions. Yet the question of machine literature comes into close contact with these conversations—the practice of talking with machines evolving out of precisely such thought experiments as Searle's Chinese room.

    In rehashing the premise of Searle's Chinese room, we therefore have a slightly different vantage point from those interested in the difference between functionalist (behavior oriented) and structuralist (intent-oriented) explanations of cognitive phenomena. Note, for example, that the Chinese room is not strictly a mechanical contraption. It contains inanimate elements proper (the room itself), an algorithm for deciphering the sinographs (presumably produced by other human programmers), and finally, you—the human who does the looking-up and the sorting of the characters. The Chinese room is clearly not a simple inanimate object then. It is an amalgam of species. The wonderfully strange (and I am guessing, unintended) byproduct of Searle's thought experiment is the inversion of the mechanistic model of the mind—since it is not that he asks us to imagine a machine inside the human brain, but a whole human being inside the machine. And so we might follow Searle's intuition to say that the Chinese room does not really speak Chinese. Or, we might take the functionalist approach to the problem, and maintain that we don't really care about the innards of the black box: it seems to speak Chinese, and so it does. I do, however, want to point our attention toward the algorithm at work inside the contraption—the very chart by which the human is able to blindly sort the appropriate responses in a language that she does not speak. Were we to try and locate the seat of intelligence in the overall system, it does seem that we would have to single out this humble piece of paper—for it is the only inalienable part of the overall mechanism. We could take away the room, replace the human with a computer, and still have essentially the same experiment. If anything generates language proficiency in the Chinese room, it is this algorithm—which means that the emphasis on the computer in the conversation on artificial intelligence is slightly misplaced. Just like the Chinese room, the computer is a disposable black box. Were we to atomize the metaphor of "artificial intelligence," it would be the algorithm that would contain the "artificial" and the "intelligence" portions of the mechanism.
    What is an algorithm? The word itself comes from the Arabic Al-Ḵuwārizmī, which according to the Oxford English Dictionary means "the native of Ḵwārazm (Ḵiva), surname of the Arab mathematician Abu Ja'far Mohammed Ben Musa, who flourished early in the 9th cent., and through the translation of whose work on Algebra, the Arabic numerals became generally known in Europe." The original meaning of the word simply denoted "the Arabic, or decimal system of numeration."4 But in the contemporary sense it means something like "a process, or a set of rules," or perhaps a "step-by-step procedure" for reaching a decision or a clinical diagnosis in the case of medicine.5 As such, the algorithm looks to be a type of what J.L. Austin dubbed as a "performative utterance." In contrast to descriptive statements ("The emperor isn't wearing anything at all!"), a performative utterance has the qualities of a) being unfalsifiable and b) constituting an action or a part of the action.6 Austin's paradigmatic illustration for these two properties are the wedding vows. Saying "I do" does not describe the action in a way where the description could be considered true or false. The vows are a kind of action. They bring something forth in a way a needle prick can bring forth the reaction of pain. 

    The algorithm looks to be a special kind of a performative utterance, which differs from other types in that it does not elicit the action immediately. The algorithm is a time capsule of sorts—it will perform when it is called to action (where the wedding vows are valid as soon as they are uttered). This seems like a minor difference at first—the ability to shift something I will now, into action later. Imagine for example, a contraption that will cook an egg for me at some specified time in the future. It is as if a splinter of my volitional desire (to cook an egg) has been broken off to perform an action by itself (cooking the egg), independently and yet on my behalf. In this way the algorithm, although being a dead, inanimate thing (made out of symbols), seems to possess a spark of animate force capable of acting in the world. The algorithm is a special kind of performative utterance which, like an enchanted object, continues to do the master's bidding even in the absence of the master. We could call these kinds of utterances "imperative." 
    The imperative is a type of a performative utterance in that it enacts rather than describes things in the world. Unlike other performatives, the imperative utterance is often meant to enact something at a later time and place, without the immediate presence of the original author. The paradigmatic example of an imperative utterance would be the legal concept of a will, by which "a person's formal declaration of his intention as to the disposal of his property or other matters to be performed after his death, most usually made in writing."7 The legal definition contains something common to all such imperatives, namely that they must usually be recorded somehow—on paper, on audio tape, video, or by similar means. All this to say that an imperative utterance is usually a document of some sort. Looking back into Searle's thought experiment, we see that the Chinese room does contain a document of that kind. Something does speak Chinese in the room—the look-up chart which contains the heuristic that we were asked to follow blindly. At the very least we would have to agree that the person composing the chart does speak Chinese, and that his language ability was transposed in time and place by the means of that document. But is that ability transferred to the mechanism of the black box, or does it remain squarely in the mind of the original Chinese speaker? This and similar problems contained in the premise of procedurally-derived literature cannot be resolved by the purely theoretical thought exercise. We must look to the archive for the traces of machine composition and consider the practice of interacting with algorithmically-composed texts.

Here is where I begin to get a little suspicious about the accepted history of ideas when it comes to formalism as a movement in literary criticism. In 1894, Georges Polti—a relatively minor French author—published Les Trente-Six Situations Dramatiques (translated into English in 1916 by William R. Kane as "Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations," published by the Editor Company). Judging by the number of imitations, the work was an almost immediate international success and remains in print today, in 2010. Unlike Propp, Polti is very explicit about his influences. The work begins with a quote from J.W. Goethe, who writes that "Gozzi1 maintained that there can be but thirty-six tragic situations. Schiller took great pains to find more, but he was unable to find even so many as Gozzi."2 Polti writes that "in France, Gerard de Nerval3 alone had grasped and presented briefly the ensemble of all dramatic production, in an article upon Soumet's 'Jane Grey,' in L' Artiste,"4 but that "since Nerval, no one has treated, in Gozzi's genuinely technical manner, of the secrets of invention."5 To derive his thirty-six situations Polti assembles "the principal dramas of China, of India, of Judea, and, needless to say, of the Greek theater," along with "the Spanish authors, the French classics, the Italians, the Germans of the Romantic revival, and our modern dramatic literature," and finally "two hundred of the examples […] from other literary genres akin to the dramatic: romance, epic, history, and from reality [!]"6 The stated purpose of Polti's project is to ask "Which are the dramatic situations neglected by our own epoch? […] Which, on the other hand, are most in use today? Which are the most neglected, and which the most used, in each epoch, genre, school, author? What are the reasons for these preferences?"7 These questions lead Polti to his thirty-six situations: supplication, deliverance, crime, pursuit, disaster, revolt, abduction, enigma, madness, ambition, and so on. Many of these correspond to Propp's thirty-one morphemes, although to his credit, Propp's improves on Polti's scheme by arranging the situations in chronological (from the point of view of the plot) sequence.
    Despite the lofty historical and philosophical ambitions, Polti's work skews decidedly towards the craft of writing plots. The reader never does find out why certain "situations" are more prevalent in one epoch or the other. Rather the book's conclusion contains the following remarkable appeal to the reader:
Thus, from the first edition of this little book, I might offer (speaking not ironically but seriously) to dramatic authors and theatrical managers, ten thousand scenarios, totally different from those used repeatedly upon our stage in the last fifty years. The scenarios will be, needless to say, of a realistic and effective character. I will contract to deliver a thousand in eight days. For the production of a single gross, but twenty-four hours are required. Prices quoted on single dozens. Write or call, No. 19, Passage de l'Elysee des Beaux-Arts. The Situations will be detailed act by act, and, if desired, scene by scene.8

Besides Polti's largely unacknowledged influence on the development of Russian Formalism,9 the principle impact of his work was and remains in the field of applied composition studies. Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations inspired countless imitations in the "writer's aid" genre, among these the most popular examples being William Wallace Cook's Plotto (1928), and Wycliffe A. Hill's Plot Genie (1931),10 among many others. Plot Genie in particular shows the genre's direct lineage to Ramon Llull's combinatorial diagrams. The booklet came with a cardboard wheel, by which the author could select a random combination of characters and plot devices.11
    The proliferation and the popularity of combinatorial writer aids in the early twentieth century have to be attributed, at least in part, to the burgeoning American pulp fiction market. James D. Wood—a scholar and a contributor to The Pulp Companion online fan community—describes it in the following terms: 
The year is 1935. On every street corner, newsstands are brimming with pulp magazines. Readers young and old thrill to the battles of G-8 and Operator 5, to the adventures of the Spider, the Shadow and Doc Savage […] You are a pulp fiction writer. Seated behind your Remington typewriter, your fingers dance and the pages fly: trench-coated private eyes and sultry gun molls, hard riding sheriffs and gun-slinging desperadoes, fearless spacemen and bug-eyed monsters—for a penny a word, you can do it all […] It’s Friday night. After a long day at the keyboard, should you have a bite of supper or just go to bed? The phone rings. It’s the editor of Strange Science Magazine, and as usual, he sounds like he’s double-parked. "I need a 50,000 word space opera,” he barks. "On my desk, first thing Monday morning!" As a pulp fiction writer, you are a professional. You have no time to sit and wait to be inspired—you must produce on demand. As much as you need your dictionary and thesaurus, you need your story plotter.12

The turn of the twentieth century—modernism—is commonly characterized as the dawning of mass production: interchangeable parts, machine tools, and electrical power. We are accustomed to thinking that the paradigmatic aesthetic concern of the moderns was mass production, or rather the mass mechanical re-production of the work of art. Mechanical reproduction certainly contributed to the sharp decline in book prices in the first decades of the twentieth century, but the means of producing texts underwent a radical change too, unrelated to the mechanisms of the printing press. In the twentieth century we began to produce and consume algorithmically-constructed texts on a large scale.
    Polti's Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations, Cook's Plotto, and Hills' Plot Genie were met with excoriating critical reception. "The subject and the scorn almost placed the subject of situation in the category of untouchables," Carl Dahlström writes in the 1936 issue of PMLA. In the concluding sentences of his book, Cook reports a conversation with a London publisher who believes that "Plotto will be condemned publicly—and probably used privately."13 The critical exile continues to this day: JSTOR14 contains exactly one article devoted to Polti's work, a single mention of Plotto in a French-language article on mass literature, and nothing on Plot Genie.15 By what logic does the relatively obscure Vladimir Propp become canonized in the graduate literary studies curriculum,16 and the massively popular Georges Polti relegated to almost complete obscurity? I want to make sure that my intentions in asking this are not misunderstood. I have no interest in promoting Polti's work, or detracting from Propp's contribution to the field. I merely want to point to the intuitive sense of collective discomfort with the notion of algorithmic composition. The idea just seems somehow to lessen the weight given to human agency in the act of literary creation—even to the point of preventing conversation on the topic. Polti himself understood this problem very clearly: "But I hear myself accused, with much violence, of an intent to 'kill imagination.' 'Enemy of fancy!' 'Destroyer of wonders!' 'Assassin of prodigy!" he writes at the end of Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations. "These and similar titles cause me not a blush," he concludes.17 
    The enemy, in this case, is what Polti calls "the ultra-romantic" notion of the imagination—"the charlatanesque 'faculty,' analysis of which is, it would seem, eternally interdicted."18 Polti writes:
One vigorous blow was, for the moment, given to this legend of the Imagination by Positivism, which asserted that this so-called creative faculty was merely the kaleidoscope of our memories, stirred by chance. But it did not sufficiently insist upon the inevitably banal and monotonous results of these chance stirrings, some of our memories-precisely those least interesting and least personal-repeating themselves a thousand times in our minds, returning mercilessly in all manner of method-less combinations.19

The alternative to the method-less meandering of romantic imagination is guided experimentation. Here Polti envisions the extension of his inquiry, a "New Art" that thrives on the numerous, yet unexplored combinations of dramatic possibility.20 Pulp fiction was perhaps that new art, but Polti and his followers could not have anticipated the radical potential of procedural composition enabled by the developments in computer science and information technology.

Lull. Eco.

## Leibniz (binary code)
## Boolean logic
## Church on logic gates
## Turing on the universal machine
## Hardware, Software, Algorithm
One of my favorite "virtual" disagreements in print is between Kittler and Lev Manovich. "There is No Hardware" and "There is Only Software."

Turing's machine. Universalism vs. drucker. Bit, byte. State machines. The magic of boostrapping. Plato and Epicurus.
## Cloud computing

## Monistic Visions 
"Neuroscience has put a new spin on free will and culpability: It "can help us see that all behavior is mechanical, that all behavior is produced by chains of physical events that ultimately reach back to forces beyond the agent’s control."

Post humanism as latent monism. What is the problem with monism? Two types of monism:
stuff monism and thing monism. Everything is made of the same matter (information). Everything is a part of the same thing, living organism. S

Todd Presner and the Ethics of the Algorithm. Drucker on What is? (mathesis).

Humanism: Agency, Deliberation, Consensus, Dissent.
Assuming for now that the reader holds some, if not all, of these ideals I ask: to what extent do the platforms that define contemporary media use answer to their implicit ideals? Impoverished platforms.

But to begin answering it we must make a short detour into the somewhat arid land of systems theory. The idea of autopoiesis was popularized by the biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela in the early 1970s. It means literally "self-creation" or "self-production." Maturana and Varela used the term to describe an essential property of a living system. The autopoietic, and therefore living, organism is defined as "a unity of components which (i) participate recursively in the same network of productions of components which produced these components, and (ii) realize the network of productions as a unity in the space in which the components exist."1 The paradigmatic example of such a system is a biological cell, whose components exhibit spatial integrity, and which maintains the production of its internal components to perpetuate its existence. All this to say that an autopoietic system produces and maintains its own constituent parts, in contrast to an allopoietic system—take a wrist watch for example—which relies on other systems for its maintenance (in this case, human labor). Subsequent to its introduction, the concept of autopoiesis has found wide-spread use in general systems theory and in the study of large-scale social systems: science, business, law, and literature. Thus, for example, in his influential 1985 monograph on the sociological theory of law, Niklas Luhmann envisions the legal system as an autopoietic, self-organizing entity operating within a distinct sphere of influence. Others, like the literary theorist Joseph Tabbi, have applied the concept of autopoiesis to literature, which as a system also seems to be self-reflexive, self-organizing, and self-perpetuating.2 

Critics have pointed out that such an extension of the original concept is metaphorical at best, and at worst can lead to a kind of an "epistemological solipsism."3 The first problem is that autopoiesis was originally meant to describe living organisms, as opposed to non-living ones. In so far as they are living organisms, social systems like law or literature patently occupy a different order of existence than biological ones like cells or primates. It is therefore not very clear as to what we may mean when we call the legal or the literary systems "self-organizing," since it is precisely the living "self" in "self-organization" that we are trying to establish. And it does not help that in colloquial speech, we often do ascribe other volitional or intentional properties to whole systems, as is the case when we say something like "the people have spoken" or "corporation XYZ made a decision to stop selling its products." In all of these examples, the unified and self-perpetuating quality of the given system seems either imprecise or metaphorical. Thus, "the people have spoken" may actually mean "there was a national vote," and "corporation XYZ made a decision" may simply mean that its board members met and have decided on something among themselves. In this anthropomorphizing imprecision, the distinction between the living and the non-living systems itself gets lost.

The second problem stems from the first. In identifying the body politic or a corporation as a type of volitional or intentional entity, we in effect already have drawn an artificial boundary around its constituent members. By contrast, a cell presents a clearly demarcated membrane that separates its internal functions form the external. One may object that even a cell is not a truly unified or self-reliant system, requiring external resources for its operation. This problem intensifies when we apply the concept of autopoiesis to social systems, which are not particularly well-insulated entities—as is the case with governments, corporations, and literature. Such systems lack "natural" membranes that clearly demarcate their insides from their outsides. Moreover, both cells and social systems are fundamentally bound by laws of nature and firmly enmeshed in the context of their habitation. Thus to see their operation as "self-generating" is to engage in a kind of a solipsistic epistemology, by which we imagine a particular system as a hermeneutically sealed unit, separate from its environment, and able to produce its own circumstances, or as the extreme version of the proposition would have it, its own reality.4 The idea of literature as an autopoietic system must be subject to these very same caveats. Before even considering the possibility of literature as an autopoietic entity, we must understand that social systems are by definition artificially constructed entities, that they lack clear boundaries, and that their function cannot be strictly equated, even on the systems level, to the operation of biological organisms.

Technology, Complex Systems, in defense of Humanism
Post humanism. Complex systems. Neo platonism. A disempowering political program. If you think complex systems have emerging intelligence, they have the right to speak. There is something like intelligence, but there is a mode of intelligence that should be reserved for humans. Plain text offers that possibility. No amount of fancy theoretical footwork can obscure real inequalities that exist in the world today. Platform lock in. Global south. Mumford. Values cannot come from within systems. There has to be an outside, and the Kantian solution is to proceed as if there is an outside. That is a small space to remain human, all the more befuddling when that space is diminished by those professing in the humanities. Reading of Heidegger. Technology that answers to human values. 

My concern is with post-human ideology, that, in the name of forests, animals, and ecosystems, brings algorithms, markets, military bots, and manufactured goods into the sphere of ethics as actors. The agenda is one of determinism, which in its many guises has always been used as a mode of oppression, control, and to excuse violence.

Agency is a tiny and speculative bulwark against forces of determinism. We should not be too eager to dismantle it. In that light, poisoning oceans etc. can only make sense as a human relationship. Someone must be on that other shore! An ethics posited between a man and an ocean alone are dangerous and impossible. I'd site the lineage of good ole Kant, Marx, Sartre, and Arendt for that line of reasoning,

How to confront the foundational violence of humanism. Use non-European sources here as well.

Latent monism. Plotonius. Monism of the underlying matter (everything is made of one stuff, information) and monism of the universe is one: Dr. Bronner's monism.

Monism is bad because it totalizes reality. There is no space for dissent. Monism and pluralism the same. Computation is the pinnicle of secular idealism. But it must be moderated by a retreat into the material, and into the human, which is a always a being part god and part man and woman. Yes this is a species of dualism. But without dualism, there's no space to escape the totalizing pull of the algorithm.

Computation then is the pinnacle of secular universalism, or secular idealism. The traditional space of the intellect / soul / mind / rationality is now taken on by the algorithm. Humanism is what moderates such universalism, which always threatens to subsume concrete existence into a monistic totality, from which dissent is not possible (think of the Borg in Star Trek--total assimilation into one shared reality, the hive, a rhizomatic, unified whole). Humanism (when applied justly too all members of our species) also allows us to enter into shared projects: to deliberate and to consent. But these projects are limited engagements: discrete in time and space. They do not equal to all of reality. There's space in-between. Each allows for the possibility for dissent, which frees us for new projects, the possibility of quiet self-reflection, and the possibility to reconstitute ourselves in ever changing and non-arbitrary ways.
### Hospital as an Archive

### Electronic Discovery

### Media Archeology
This is not a technological prolbem. Prolifiration of formats ensures a business of waste. Data must be stored in human readable formats both so we can study it AND to protect it. This is not just minimal computing for them, but a vision of computing for us. It is a political stance. The weight of .pdf vs. .txt. It is not a computational challenge. Digital dicay. The need to obviate media archeology. Data must be held in plain text.

### New Humanism
Humans as systems. But as recursive and self referential systems. The ability to incorporate models to alter behavior. Frustrates predicative models. Charles Goodhart "Goodhart's Law." and Robert Lucas. Lucas Critique. Pluralism.

"We recognize that separating humanity from nature, from the whole of life, leads to humankind’s own destruction and to the death of nations. Only through a re-integration of humanity into the whole of nature can our people be made stronger. That is the fundamental point of the biological tasks of our age. Humankind alone is no longer the focus of thought, but rather life as a whole . . . This striving toward connectedness with the totality of life, with nature itself, a nature into which we are born, this is the deepest meaning and the true essence of National Socialist thought.” – National Socialist professor of biology, Ernst Lehmann."

Opposed to monism. Dialogical and dialectical systems. Including dualism!

Monism. Haeckel, Ernst the Monist League (*Monistenbund*) as the founding of the Nazi Party. "The religion of the future" from Otto Herrmann's article. 

"Modern science and philosophy are revealing the world to us as a spiritual commonwealth, self-existing, self-governing and self directing." (Herrmann, 1913). The idea of ecology is not necessarily offensive. It is when it is turned into monism, one ecology in other words, is when it becomes fascism.

The ideas that systems are self directing. 

Christianity embracing dualism (strangely enough). I write this as a committed atheist.

"Any observed statistical regularity will tend to collapse once pressure is placed upon it for control purposes"  Goodhart, Charles (1981). "Problems of Monetary Management: The U.K. Experience". Anthony S. Courakis (ed.), Inflation, Depression, and Economic Policy in the West (Rowman & Littlefield): 111–146

Campbell, Donald T., Assessing the Impact of Planned Social Change The Public Affairs Center, Dartmouth College, Hanover New Hampshire, USA. December, 1976.

"The more any quantitative social indicator (or even some qualitative indicator) is used for social decision-making, the more subject it will be to corruption pressures and the more apt it will be to distort and corrupt the social processes it is intended to monitor."

These sociologists are noticing a broader effect. Humans are recursive machines. We are able to reprogram ourselves in opposition to predicative model. We trade on the knowledge gap. Those who are modelled and those able to escape modeling. Sartre and negation. More than negation. A positive ability to incorporate model and to morph into new practices. Agency, deliberation, consensus, dissent. <-- this should be the last word of the book!

