
## Gerard Genette and Nelson Goodman on the nature of textual copies,

## "reading" from the perspective of a copy machine

I want to foreshadow now what
will become the punchline of the whole book: namely that the ghost in the
machine cannot be reduced to some vague notions of value---these amount to a
distraction, which lies plainly upon the surface. The conspicuous ghostly
apparition (indicating the absence of a living subject) is agency itself,
which, for now, necrotically attaches itself to dead things like systems,
mediums, and automated discourses. If all this talk of value, ghosts, and
necromancy sounds familiar, the reader will not be surprised when I advance
Karl Marx as a preeminent theorist of the algorithm and someone able to help us
reason through Kittler's computational conundrum. On towards Marx then (who
will appear much later), through the machine that, although intimately familiar
to every writer and consumer of text by touch, remains alien and alienating in
its hidden possibilities, soothing and threatening all at once.  


When viewed in the context of book history, the universal Turing machine
signifies a consummation of several broad, long-term trends that begin with the
invention of writing itself.  The material history of literary
computing begins with petrified words that endure forever, and ends with word
as an electrical charge: animated, radiant, fluid, and iridescent
[@mcgann_radiant_2001; @bryant_fluid_2002].
Device. Splits All type is moveable type. At the same tim

which "sees" pages
as monolithic images. 

We often think of literary works as completed products. *To the Lighthouse,*
*Hamlet,* *Moby Dick* seem to circulate as complete, fixed entities. Textual
critics, in charge of creating a work out of a multiplicity of texts, remind us
that the work is a carefully-crafted illusion. The text multiplies, always
threatening to undermine the unity of the work. Think of something substantial
you have written recently: a paper or a proposal perhaps.

"Computer assisted tracing of text evolution"

Goodman's "Art and Authenticity." Benjamin. Immanence and transcendence.
Goodman: thinking about the perfect copy. But there is a confusion here: fake
art is not necessarily about a copy, it is about provenance. Autographic vs.
allographic art. Whether forgery is possible. Digital vs. analog art. Analog
art is medium bound. Digital abstracts from the material.

Duplicates in Computer Science. Almost 30% of webpages are "very similar to
other pages" [@fetterly_evolution_2003].

It is a commonplace sentiment now that the printing press brought with it the
Protestant Reformation [@dittmar_information_2011, @febvre_coming_2010,
@mcluhan_gutenberg_1962, @eisenberg_word_1992]. Movable type is responsible for
at least a part of that story. The mechanization of print is what turned
writing from an autographic into a supremely allographic art. The Gutenberg
press helped place a copy of the bible into the hands of every ordinary
believer. That meant also minimizing the role of the priest as a privileged
interpreter. Without books in hand Martin Luther could not have written "all
who are in the church are priests" [@hillerbrand_protestant_2009]. Movable type
lifted text from rarefied media of parchment into that of the reified and
disposable leaflet. But until well into the middle of the 20th century, the
printing press remained in the realm of big technology: expensive, centralized,
unwieldy, and relatively easy to suppress. The liberatory potential of media
independence comes into its full fruition after the age of the typewriter.
After a historically brief flowering in the wild, our daily textual practice is
once again in danger of returning to controlled, media-bound, and
tightly-regulated conditions of existence.

Several important developments in the twentieth century aided in the liberation
of text from its material contexts. The first is the copy machine.  It is an
entirely unglamorous job to ponder the phenomenology of reading from the point
of view of a photocopier. Yet the impact of the humble Ditto and Xerox machines
has only recently began to get the scholarly attention it deserves. In the
United States, the copy machine placed a smaller version of Gutenberg press
into every office. And it allowed for the flourishing of a vibrant samizdat
(self-publishing) scene, usually connected to underground culture movements
without access to conventional publishing: punks, skinheads, computer- and
game- geeks, feminists, fans of science fiction and queer-core music
[@klanten_behind_2011, @piepmeier_girl_2009, @duncombe_notes_2008].

The word "xerox" firmly entered the English lexicon by the
mid-1960s[^ln11-xerox] along with stencil duplicators, mimeograph machines,
microfiche, spirit duplicators,[^ln11-spirit] hectographs, and dot-matrix
printing. A whole industry of photocopying still exists to seamlessly peel the
content away from one material medium and plaster it into another.

From the "point of view" of a photocopier, the text exists only as pure form.
The electro-photographic process at the basis of modern photocopying (invented
in the 1930s, but with patents dating back to the middle of the 19th century)
describes documents in terms of "electric charge patterns," "photoemissive
layers," and "sheet surfaces"  [@carlson_electron_1940,
@carlson_electrophotography_1942, @carlson_graphic_1953]. The photocopier is a
device for total graphesis and extreme surface reading.[^ln11-ooo]. There is no
word or content for the photocopier: only paper and image. The photocopier's
"job", if you will, is to lift a picture from one page and to impress it into
another. It does so by temporarily imaging text (as picture) onto a
photo-sensitive drum. Ink powder sticks to the electrically charged surfaces of
the drum in correspondence to the shapes on the page. The shapes are then
rolled onto a new page, re-inscribing the image into the new medium. The text
is never immaterial. But for a moment it finds shape as an invisible electric
charge. The transformation should not be reduced to some sort of mystical,
metaphysical moment. On the contrary, in instrumental terms we observe the
relatively mundane process of media independence.

Let's linger on that moment of remediation. The process of textual
transcription by hand involves a similar transformation. When a scribe copies a
page from the bible, for example, he also "lifts" content from paper.  Not
unlike a photocopier, the human stores text in the electro-chemical pathways of
the brain, before reproducing it once again into another medium. And like a
photocopier, the human can perform the copy function mechanically, without
comprehension and on a purely formal, visual level. In fact, the historical
record is full of errors that suggest that pre-modern scribes wrote at widely
varying levels of literacy [@goudsmit_illiterate_1974,
@bucking_training_2007].[^ln11-literacy] In the Muslim tradition, the prophet
Muhammad himself is sometimes called "the unlettered prophet," to emphasize
fidelity and lack of mediation in the transcription of the message
[@calder_ummi_1990, @gunther_muhammad_2002, 1-26]. In other words, the Qur'an
claim to authenticity relies on the prophet's ability to copy the message
"verbatim." On the conservative Muslim view, anything but a faithful
transcription of the original text amounts to an interpretation, not
self-identical to the letter of the text (a translation, for example)
[@tibawi_is_1962, @fatani_translation_2005, @wilson_first_2009].[^ln11-quran]

Where the photocopier placed a printing press into every office, the printer
placed one on every desk. Falling cost of print.

Finally, the text exists on the screen and magnetic media only, where the cost
of reproduction approaches zero.

## the crisis of authenticity

It is quite odd, if you think about it, to believe that objects somehow retain
an aura or a trace of their history: "a handkerchief used by Princess Diana,"
or "the cigar box owned by President Kennedy." In some real sense, the
historical patina covering these objects is only imagined. President Kennedy's
fingerprints and the tears of Princess Diana have long disappeared from their
physical medium. Their trace cannot be reduced to "mere" physical
characteristics: that is, to actual scratches, stains, or molecules,
recoverable from the object. Rather, the object had to "be there" in some way,
acquiring a patina of authenticity. "Having been there" is what gives the
object value, sentimental or otherwise, in a condition that refuses formal
reduction to a set of merely material properties. The high price contemporary
society places on authentic artifacts is therefore a type of magical thinking.
Walter Benjamin's famous essay on the work of art in the age of mechanical
reproduction appears to both celebrate and lament the demise of such magic.
"The technique of reproduction detaches the reproduced object from the domain
of tradition," wrote Benjamin. "By making many reproductions it substitutes a
plurality of copies for a unique existence. And in permitting the reproduction
to meet the beholder or listener in his own particular situation, it
reactivates the object reproduced. These two processes lead to a tremendous
shattering of tradition which is the obverse of the contemporary crisis and
renewal of mankind" [@benjamin_work_1969, 217-253]. And yet, for Benjamin, the
easy reproducibility of modern art forms like film and photography also
"emancipates the work of art from its parasitical dependence on ritual"
[@benjamin_work_1969, 217-253]. One could read Benjamin's famous essay as a
piece of technological nostalgia, or as an expose on the magic and superstition
latent in modernist art. Crisis or emancipation? Benjamin feels both, and in
doing so he captures the metaphysical anxiety of the modern age. We desire for
our Vermeers to stay special but also for a Vermeer to hang in every home,
peering back at us from a multitude of anonymous reproductions.

The modern world faces the challenge of authenticity, which we have only began
to assimilate: politically, economically, and philosophically. The ubiquitous
holographic certificate of authenticity on a luxury handbag or on a "Digital
Versatile Disk" (how antiquated the DVD sounds already!) is a cheap band-aid
hiding the immaterial nature of these artifacts. Fashion and software companies
are reluctant to talk publicly about piracy,[^ln11-counter] because the so
called "knock-offs" are essentially exact duplicates, often "leaked" from the
very same factories producing the original.

Note that it makes no sense to talk about "what was meant" by the designer of
the handbag, the way textual critic may talk about authorial intention. Nor
would it make sense to "correct" some perceived flaw in the painting by
Vermeer. The practice parallel to "textual criticism" in visual arts is
restoration. Although similar to textual criticism in its aims to recover some
notion of the original, crucially, the practice of art restoration takes place
without reproduction. Unlike a critical volume, which essentially reprints the
work in its reconstructed entirety, restoration happens at the site. All
"unauthorized" copies constitute a forgery that competes for attention with the
original. One could say that for painting and handbags "matter is synonymous
with meaning," but the sentiment strains at the limits of critical vocabulary
in the tradition that gives us only the binaries of form and content.

The context-dependence of an artifact is not even medium-specific, as
Goodman would suggest. Texts are more allographic than handbags and paintings,
but Vermeers and Louis Vuitton purses are also in some sense perfectly
reproducible, like texts. They are texts, and I do not mean it in some
post-structuralist notion of "everything is a text."[^ln11-derrida]

Technologies like 3D scanning and printing increasingly reduce physical objects
to their textual representation, as is the case with the stereo lithographic
document (STL) format that describes objects for 3D printing.  Here, for
example, I reproduce code that describes "a surface" of a functional gun (the
code made available online by *Defense Distributed*, a self-described civic
liberty activist group):

```
22=(
BOUNDED_SURFACE()
B_SPLINE_SURFACE(1,2,((#34104,#34105,#34106),(#34107,#34108,#34109)),
 .UNSPECIFIED.,.F.,.F.,.F.)
B_SPLINE_SURFACE_WITH_KNOTS((2,2),(3,3),(15.1641909236141,15.3257778193699),
(2.99329024107099,3.14159265358979),.UNSPECIFIED.)
GEOMETRIC_REPRESENTATION_ITEM()
RATIONAL_B_SPLINE_SURFACE(((1.,0.997252058758362,1.),(1.,0.997252058758362,
1.)))
REPRESENTATION_ITEM('')
SURFACE()
);
```

This piece of code exists in its Platonic ideal *before* the physical artifact.
As costs of reproduction approach zero, so does the line between an object and
its description. Imagine a world where to think "gun" is also to seamlessly
bring one into existence. The erosion of boundaries between object and idea has
a pronounced effect on the governance of goods, felt precisely at the
distinction between the autographic and the allographic. Governments currently
regulate the manufacture and the distribution of guns as artifacts, but how
does one regulate guns as texts and ideas? Any such effort amounts to
censorship. What was first regulated under the regime of property law, now
increasingly falls under the regimes of intellectual property and rights to
speech. Where does that leave the practice of textual criticism? In such a
world there can be no distinction between works and texts. Unlike millions of
reproduced Vermeers (which no doubt occupy this world in the form of postcards,
posters, and photographs), text is text. It lies before us in glorious
flatness, as thick as a sheet of paper.

Text as I have already began to define it Chapter One, is a digital mode of
representation, defined, at least in part, by a relative lack of "stickiness"
to its physical medium. Textual artifacts therefore exhibit the dualism between
text and work to a much greater extent than other forms of art and
communication. A Vermeer is always a work. Not so with *Hamlet*. "Hamlet" may
indicate a category of relate, or, an individual instance of a given work.
Philosophers Nelson Goodman and Catherine Elgin explain this peculiarity by
making the distinction between "works of art whose identity depends on their
history of production" and works whose identity does not. The former they call
"autographic" and the latter "allographic" [@goodman_reconceptions_1988, 65].
These terms will be useful for us throughout the book. Architecture and
painting, in this view, are strongly autographic disciplines. An exact copy of
a Vermeer or of a building by Frank Lloyd Wright could never rise to the status
of the original. The originals have what Walter Benjamin called an "aura or
authenticity." No amount of precision, down to the molecular level, could
substitute for the historical patina of the original artifact.

### 5.4 Problem of Drafts

Text as vector. Barthes: text as "an organism which grows by vital
expansion"[@barthes_work_1978, 161].  "The metaphor of the Text is that of the
*network*" [@barthes_work_1978, 161].

Internet is not rhyzomatic. Mediation is at stake. " But the bottom line is
that dumb-pipe email is unmediated, and therefore it's a business that Google
wants to get out of as soon as it can."

" It's also why I believe Google will kill Gmail as soon as it comes up with a
mediated alternative everyone loves. Of course, Google may offer an antiquated
"Gmail view" as a semi-obscure alternative to the default "Inbox"-like mediated
experience."

Problem of Drafts and Versions Documents as vectors. Not completed things.
Files as cognitive scaffolding for collective memory. Vissman.

Science lecture vs. humanities. Stuff that is known. Stuff that is not known

What does it really mean to "know" something? Or to have "read" a book? I have
had the following conversation countless times. Someone asks, "Have you read
Nabokov's *Pale Fire*," and I respond, "Yes I have." But there is a world of a
difference between reading it yesterday, last week, or ten years ago. The book
as an interface leaves an organic trace in the human mind---an imprint that
begins to fade as soon as it is created.

How much knowledge is there in the world? According to a recent paper published
in Science, 295 exabytes (or billion gigabytes).[@hilbert_info_2012;]

Whatever consciousness is, it is propelled forward on a thin edge of material
substratum. Reality exists only in the now, where the past is a memory and the
future only a possibility. Imagine whispering something to a friend. It does
not have to be very complicated, something like "I love you" or "I miss you."
The whisper dissipates as soon it is uttered. The percussion of the speaker's
breath creates temporary order: giving shape and pushing air molecules into
waves of pattern and form. That order begins dissipating as soon as it is
created. Within milliseconds, molecules return to their natural state of chaos.

To steel ourselves against entropy, we change the substratum from air to stone.
It's molecules are more stable. Etched in stone will be the same message. It
will last longer now. But it will also take longer to create. You will have to
carry around your tablet and chisel. The message etched in stone will outlive
the whisper and indeed will

Repercussion? How we preserve ourselves today affects the future. Appointment
with self.

Leroi-Gourhan, André.

The book as an interface between human and ?. We must see it in the context of
interfaces.

Wikipedia as a Turing complete language. The power of versioning. Text as a
vector. The problem of annotation. What are we annotating? Annotation solutions
force a platform. Is Hamlet a platonic object? A family of related objects?
Standard English editions in Europe.


related to the plummeting costs of digital
reproduction. The supposedly "dead" authors continue to draw checks from
copyrighted work. 


## 5.3 Smart Contracts (A Legal Interlude)

Legal fictions rise to veil the emerging affordances of
textual technology.

Exposing the Document Object Model that governs the production of text through
contemporary reading and writing devices gives the question of surface and
depth yet another connotation. What lies beneath the text? We are accustomed to
thinking about document structure metaphorically and answer in accord: meaning,
narrative, representation, order, discourse, or ideology. Interpretation, at
that level of analysis, happens in the head, which physically limits the
possibility of depth to personal introspection, magnetic resonance imaging, or,
at best, to an archive of extant reader responses (which in themselves need
further interpretation).

Introducing the literary device as machine, gadget, or appliance into the
formula suggests another, more literal answer. Beneath a text one finds cloth
and wood pulp and, increasingly, also glass, plastic, liquid crystal, copper,
laminates, and silicone.

The move between paper and composite device carries with it a profound shift in
the physical affordances of the deep structure supporting all subsequent,
higher-order, surface-level representations of textuality. Not much space
separates ink from paper. There, textuality lies flat, in two dimensions. What
you see is truly what you get. Not so on the screen connected to other screens.
Networked and time-shared textuality extends into the third dimension, away
from the reader and deep into the bowels of the machine. The Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) reference model of communication[^ln3-osi] describes no
less than seven layers: from the Application Layer, concerned with the
semantics of application ("all services directly comprehensible to the user
[@miller_iso_1981, 285] to the Physical Layer, providing the "mechanical,
electrical, functional, and procedural characteristics" of communication
[@ncs_open_1981; @ncs_national_1988; @day_revised_1995].[^ln3-layers] These
protocols further envelop a document already thickly stratified by the
Document Object Model.[^ln3-domlayer]

[^ln3-domlayer]: The DOM technically exists at the application layer of the OSI
model.

![A zoomed out view of the connected OSI model. Single node structure on the
left. Connected devices on the right. The user has access through the top-most
(application) level, outermost to the network [@piatkowski_iso-ansi_1980,
114-15].](images/osi.png)

These are the same layers that Alexander Galloway unites in a system of what he
calls decentralized and distributed control [@galloway_protocol_2006, 28-54].
It is distributed to be sure, although to what extent decentralized is a matter
of some debate. Like a good soldier, each device in the pictured network
internalizes dozens if not hundreds of protocols that enable the system to
function seamlessly as a whole (in the way, for example, that your machine can
at one moment connect to one wireless access point, and at another moment to
another, with minimal loss of connectivity). Yet, OSI protocols and the DOM are
also densely consolidated. They are, for example, legislated by specific
international governing bodies[^ln3-w3c], susceptible to the usual political
pitfalls of pan-global consortia.

Once bifurcated between storage and screen, the inscription travels along a
"pipeline" of protocols, undergoing a set of arbitrary transformations
throughout. On one device, that pipeline may extend just a few inches,
connecting disk storage and output display. On a network device that pipeline
can stretch across continents, spanning widely divergent regions of legal and
administrative control. The book you are reading here may be stored in another
state or country. Whatever the case may be, the subject encounters the
"protocol stack" from without, on the periphery of the onion-like network. When
paging through an electronic book (usually an OSI-compliant device displaying
DOM-structured files), for example, the reader has access only to the outputs
emanating from the application layer, and, at that, only at the exposed
"window" level of the DOM. The perceived "content" constitutes a small fraction
of the underlying "formal" topology. What you see is far less than what you
get.

[^ln3-w3c]: The International Standards Organization (ISO) in the case of OSI,
the Internet Engineering Task Force in the case of TCP/IP, and the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) in the case of the DOM.

The application layer stops at the subject. Access to the layers intrinsic to
device operation (and consequently to analysis) are sometimes "merely" obscured
and sometimes made illicit outright, as is arguably the case with U.S. Code,
Title 17, Chapter 12, Â§1201, titled "Circumvention of copyright protection
systems" and passed as part of the "Digital Millennium Copyright Act" (DMCA) in
1998. A literary scholar may be familiar with some provisions of American
copyright law governing text as surface representation: US Code, Title 17
extends "exclusive rights" to "copyright owners" of "literary works." The
rights include the ability to "reproduce," "to prepare derivative works," "to
distribute copies," and "to perform and to display publicly" (17.1.106).
Surface representation is further subject to professional rules of conduct,
embodied in practices of quotation, citation, and attribution (or lack thereof,
as plagiarism).

In practice, the easy reproducibility of digital text (and image) has served to
erode the efficacy of copyright restrictions as a system of laws and
regulations. The work of art in the age of digital reproduction has lost much
of its already tenuous hold on the material substratum.[^ln3-illusion] Copy
technologies from photocopiers, to desktop printers, to cheap magnetic storage
and peer-to-peer file sharing networks reduce the price of copying and
dissemination to near frictionless levels. The response from the film, game,
music, and publishing industries has been to transpose mechanisms of copyright
enforcement from legal down to the infrastructural levels of enforcement, as
software and hardware: from Code to code. In the words of Charles Clark, the
late British publisher and prominent copyright attorney, "the answer to the
machine is in the machine [@clark_copyright_1996, 81-82]"---by which he meant
that copyright enforcement should be taken up on the device level by the
International Standards Organization, the very body responsible for the DOM and
the OSI communication protocol stack [@clark_copyright_1996, 84].

As an example of how that might work, Clark cites the Copyright in Transmitted
Electronic Data Report (CITED), which suggests building "a tamper proof
software module which acts rather like indestructible tachometers installed on
long-distance coaches and lorries, recording everything that happens to the
copyrighted or commercially valuable material [...] The basic idea is to link
the 'valuable material' of intellectual property to a specific piece of
software and hardware" [@consortium_c.i.t.e.d._1994; @clark_copyright_1996,
83-84].

The emergence of embedded contractual enforcement at the level of the device
can be subsumed under the broader idea of "smart contracts." In his seminal
article on "Formalizing and Securing Relationships in Public Networks," Nick
Szabo explains that "smart contracts combine protocols, user interfaces, and
promises expressed via those interfaces to formalize and secure relationships
over computer networks" [@szabo_formalizing_1997]. Clark, CITED, and Szabo were
instrumental in the rise of smart contracts in the 1990s in an attempt to
redress the fading efficacy of legal copyright protections.[^ln3-smart] "Method
and System for Managing a Data Object so as to Comply with Predetermined
Conditions for Usage" (US5845281, issued in 1998) can be instructive in this
regard. Greg Benson and Gregory H. Urich, both of Sweden, write:

> The data object owner may want to have permanent secure control over how,
when, where, and by whom his property is used. Furthermore, he may want to
define different rules of engagement for different types of users and different
type of security depending on the value of particular objects. The rules
defined by him shall govern the automated operations enabled by data services
and networking. The owner may also sell composite objects with different rules
governing each constituent objects. Thus, it is necessary to be able to
implement variable and extensible control.

The data object, in this case, stands for any media content, from books to
music, video, and software. Rather then legislating rules for copying and
distributing media, the inventors suggest that the medium itself should contain
a control layer that would "comply with predetermined conditions of usage," in
a way that can be "universally adapted to the needs of both the owner and the
user of the data object" [@benson_method_1998, 2:55].

!["Concatenated control data and AVI file in memory"
[@benson_method_1998].](images/avi-control.png)

!["Concatenated and encrypted control data and AVI file in memory"
[@benson_method_1998].](images/avi-control2.png)

The associated schematics (pictured here) show data and control codes
"concatenated" into the same underlying data structure (in this case, AVI media
container format). The seemingly innocuous "text control" layer of the 1960s,
used to specify formatting and visual style, was now extended to carry
mechanisms for legal control, tied to specific legislation.

The idea of smart contracts contains a notable artifact of implementation,
relevant to our discussion on surface reading. To the extent that control codes
are legible to the interpreter, they are also open to "abuse and
circumvention." For this reason, encryption plays a key part in the smart
contracts system. Once intertwined, data and control must be encrypted to
prevent "unauthorized access." This brings us to the glaring problem at the
very heart of smart contract implementation. The spirit of contractual law by
its very nature demands *explicit* consent. In the language of English common
law, contracts involve promises as "manifestation of intention," which "adopt
an external or objective standard for interpreting conduct
[@american_law_institute_restatement_1973, Â§1-2.]" The key words in this
passage are "external," "objective," and "interpretation."

By contrast, smart contracts, as described in the patent archive, must rely on
encrypted---that is, not human-legible---forms of tacit compliance: neither
external, objective, nor available for interpretation. The idea of encrypted
consent stands in stark opposition to a tradition of contract law that relies
on models of consent that involve expressed, mutual, explicit, and uncoerced
forms of acquiescence. Even if smart contracts were to be accompanied by
legible documentation (as Terms of Service, for example), the device user would
be compelled to blindly trust in the correspondence between the expressed
letter and the implicit mechanism of the document---the implementation still
enacted beyond scrutiny, as hidden, encrypted, and purposefully illegible
script.

Moreover, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) stipulates that "no
person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls
access to a work protected under this title (17.1201.a.1.A)." The letter of the
law further specifies that to "circumvent a technological measure," in this
case, means "to descramble a scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or
otherwise to avoid, bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a technological
measure, without the authority of the copyright owner (17.1201.a.3.A)." A
technological measure that "effectively controls access" is further defined as
a measure that "in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the
application of information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of
the copyright owner, to gain access to the work (17.1201.a.3.B)." For a
literary scholar, that means that, when encountering a text on a digital
device, reading sometimes *must* limit itself to surface phenomena. An attempt
at reading for depth---to discover the implemented terms of a smart contract,
for example---may carry with it a set of official (even criminal)
sanctions.[^ln3-fairuse]

The short history of DMCA "anti-circumvention" provisions is already littered
with ambiguous case law, that the Electronic Frontiers Foundation believes to
have the effect of "stifling a wide range of legitimate activities," "chilling
free expression and academic research," "jeopardizing fair use," and "impeding
innovation [@von_lohmann_unintended_2010]." Several incidents stand out as
particularly relevant to the study of texts and literature. One, a security
researcher exploring the activity of censorship filters on public library
computers was threatened and forced to seek DMCA exemption from the Librarian
of Congress [@fry_circumventing_2009]. Two, a Russian programmer speaking at a
security conference was jailed and detained for several months for developing
software that converts Adobe electronic book files into `.pdf` format, in a
process that could potentially remove embedded digital rights management
protections [@ferullo_major_2004; @mueller_reinventing_2004;
@postigo_information_2010]. Finally, in 2005 Agfa Monotype Corporation took
Adobe Systems to court in a dispute over the Adobe Acrobat "Free Text" tool,
which allowed users to "change text annotations using Plaintiff's TrueType
fonts" without a license [@_agfa_2005; @lipton_c_2009;
@von_lohmann_unintended_2010]. If they become precedent, any of these cases
could conceivably
be used to physically limit the efficacy of reading, close and distant.

[^ln3-fairuse]: DMCA 1201 provides for a number of complicated exemptions,
which may, under some interpretations, sanction limited use for academic
purposes. See @liu_dmca_2003; @ku_critique_2004; @herman_catch_2005;
@armstrong_digital_2006.

The impact of DMCA and smart contracts on the practices of reading, writing,
and
literary analysis is potentially immense. In the language of the DMCA, the
electronic book is not a book at all, but a "data object," in which the modest
copyright symbol gives way to "control layers [@fischer_digital_2003]." An
essay in the *Yale Journal of Law & Technology* explains it this way:

> While e-books and their print counterparts embody essentially identical
> content, from a transactional standpoint they differ considerably. Books are
> tangible goods that can be owned, sold, and passed on without express
> limitation--the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) governs their sale, while
> copyright law protects their content. But despite appearances, Kindle e-books
> are not, according to Amazon, sold at all: they are distributed under
> restrictive license terms, similar to downloaded software
[@seringhaus_e-book_2010, 150].

In these conditions, something like a poem or a novel must relinquish its claim
on the universal concrete. In doing that, it ceases to be literature and
becomes instead a device, firmly tied to its given physical affordances.
Reified as a concrete object, no longer lasting and universal, but rather
ephemeral and contingent, it is subject to the whims of the market. The device
now gains the ability to dynamically adapt itself "to the needs of both the
owner and the user." These adaptations could of course take a benign form, of
the kind suggested in "*Remix: Literatur*," where Michel Chaouli imagines a
device akin to a "literature equalizer," empowering readers to "tune" any given
text to their liking [@chaouli_remix_2009]. Don't really like intensifiers?
Just turn the "adverb knob" down! I hold on to the possibility of building such
a device with Chaouli. In the meantime, existing electronic book software and
hardware devices adapt themselves to the reader in less creative ways. Some
prevent simple copy and paste actions. Others can be used to censor and
surveil. For a textual critic, such instability of medium means analysis cannot
be confined to reading for surface meaning alone. How can close or distant
reading practices persist, when the reading device reconfigures a text
dynamically, to fit individual taste, mood, or politics?[^ln3-modern] Or, when
it simply prevents access to some of the content?

[^ln3-modern]: Note that these effects are not limited to contemporary
literature at all. In purchasing a medieval text, the reader still buys not a
text or a work but a device, which, despite the content being out of copyright
protection, may still restrict access to other, protected layers of device
function.

Smart contracts and DMCA are a conspicuous symptom ailing all text gadgets,
which offer only the illusion of flat textuality. Where a literary scholar
could hope to gleam the machinations of ideology from surface representation in
print, the literary device obscures literal flows of governance. Isomorphic
application design makes the situation worse in giving a measure of similarity
between page and screen (the definition of isomorphism), obscuring material
divergence beneath. The condition is not one of ephemeral, immaterial text, but
one of text burdened with hardware and illegible control structure. The task of
the critic becomes then to restore text to its proper mode of being in the
concrete universal: to give it permanence in the world of ideas and to free it
from its arbitrary material constraint. To lay bare the device literally would
mean to make the mechanisms of naked political control visible. For any sort of
reading to commence, one would first need to peel away the DOMs and the
OSIs---today a task fraught with legal consequence.

[^ln1-dirt]: Think of text as substance and literature as surface. The first is
like dirt where the second is gound. We play with one on top of the other.

[^ln1-gate]: Solid state memory technology, flash memory for example, store
information in capacitor "circuit states." This by contrast with
electromagnetic storage that works by modulating electrical charge over a
magnetic surface. Solid state capacitor storage was used in the earliest
computers [@kahng_semipermanent_1967, 1296], but was prohibitively expensive to
manufacture until well into the twenty-first century, when solid state drives
began to replace electromagnetic storage in consumer electronics. In an early
(1967) paper on "A Floating Gate and Its Application to Memory Devices," Kahng
and Sze explain: "A structure has been proposed and fabricated in which
semipermanent charge storage is possible. A floating gate is placed a small
distance from an electron source. When an appropriately high field is applied
through an outer gate, the floating gate charges up. The charges are stored
even after the removal of the charging field due to much lower back transport
probability [...] Such a device functions as a bistable memory with
nondestructive read-out features. The memory holding time observed was longer
than one hour" [@kahng_floating_1967, 1288]. See also @horton_experimental_1962
and @frohman-bentchkowsky_fully_1971 on "floating gate avalanche injection."

[^ln1-denning]: These stages correspond roughly to the "three generations of
electronic computing" outlined in Peter Denning's "theory of operating systems"
[@denning_third_1971].

RETURN TO MORENO

Colonized by technology. Fanon.

Need for digital migration. Self displacement.

In an ASCII-rendered plain text file, byte count corresponds to character
count.[^ln-char] Let these words soak in for a moment. I will spend the rest of
the book unpacking this idea. We will have to come to terms with what "plain
text," "ASCII," and "bytes" really represent. But for now, a common-sense
understanding of the terms should be enough to form the intuition that texts
and characters are units of meaning that make sense to humans; and that bytes,
by contrast, "make sense" for machines. Remarkably, the two modes of
meaning-making gain a measure of equivalence under the singular condition of
plain text (and even then, not always, and with many caveats).[^ln-human],
[^ln-meaning]

Laws are created to mitigate the new affordances. I will spend much of it at
the work of "teasing apart" the layers obscuring the underlying structure of
the textual device, using historical sources, direct observation, and tools
normally reserved for reverse-engineering of data objects.[^ln5-mechanisms]

## Authorship function

The telegraph further weakens the
authorial function in transposing writing from its immediate physical
environment across vast geographical distances. The advent of telecommunication
lengthens the chain of technological mediation between author and reader. In
the absence of the identifying "hand," the telegraph clerk's and the censor's
mark cannot be distinguished from the author's (a common literary plot device
in the fiction of the period). The notion of a telegram's "fidelity" therefore
becomes an attribute of the communication channel as a whole (instead of an
attribute attached to authorial intent).
