
theorist of science and technology, called this effect the "conditioning of
technological inheritance" [@winner_autonomous_1978, 83]. Technology may not
have politics as such, but it can entail effects comparable to the force of
law, as when for example an architect fails to design for handicapped access
[@winner_artifacts_1980]. An organization can vote to exclude the handicapped
from their buildings by political means. The technical, architectural
oversight entails the same consequences---with one major difference. The
technological decision does not always go through the same channels of
democratic deliberation as voting. It carries the force of law, without the
legal framework. The commitments stick. Once embodied in stone they are
difficult to restructure [@winner_artifacts_1980]. It is, for Winner, a soft,
suggestive kind of a determinism---the determinism of affordances.

Literary technics are similarly inherited. Much of what constitutes the
technics of writing---tools, implements, practices, and vectors of
dissemination involved---are not under the author's control. If we are to
follow Benjamin, opting out must involve more than the invention of new
literary devices, akin to photo-montage or dramatic interruption. Opting out
would involve also affecting the technics of writing. The technological
inheritance is part of the linguistic as well as the material culture. To what
extent is it possible to become a maker, an engineer of textual technology?
The allure of maker culture---the making of one's own clothes, the building
one's own furnishings, the pickling one's own conserves---can be seen as a
contemporary revolt against the tyranny of received technological inheritance.
Technics, in this sense, comprise the "tactics of daily living"
[@spengler_man_1932]. As such, they reach deep into the cultural fabric. Where
does one stop? Should literary analysis involve also the architecture of one's
desk, one's room, and bookstore?

In this light, Moreno's psychodrama, Shklovsky's estrangement, and Benjamin's
interruption can all be seen as variations on the same critical materialist
practice, aimed at the analysis and the partial disruption of received
technological inheritance. Even if we break with Marx on the primacy of
production, we are still forced to acknowledge the patent relationship between
labor and poiesis. To write is to create, and to create is to work. I am
interested here in taking the formalist research program to its logical
conclusion. The notion of literary technique identifies the kind of labor
involved. Our ability to recognize literary devices like Lubbock's "telling
the story in first person" or the "autobiographic device" points to the craft
of fiction. What we lose in the passage from the novel to the book, we gain in
the understanding of how the thing is made. This process unfolds at the
interface between idea and thing, where diegetic details internal to the
narrative world connect to extra-diegetic particulates---rules, norms,
practices, and technologies---that govern interpretation. The analysis of
technique seeks to connect the ideational content of the text with its
outward, material contexts.

Modern reader takes print for granted. Tactility. The child that swipes.
The farther removed we are historically from the object of analysis, the more
foreign the dynamics of meaning formation, and the more complete the critical
description of technique. Thus to understand the palimpsests of Medieval Spain
for example we must know something (among many things) about the physical
properties of parchment, the storage and the circulation of codices, and the
practices of reading and authorial patronage.  The modern reader has the
luxury of taking print for granted. The material conditions associated with
the Gutenberg press are simply assumed to be known and transparent. Even for
Lubbock, the book and the novel are synonymous. I would not be the first
scholar to point out the dangers of ignoring the material specificity of the
literary artifact. Johanna Drucker, Jerome McGann, Katherine Hayles, and Wendy
Chun have all made a similar case at one time or another
[@drucker_digital_2001; @mcgann_radiant_2001; @chun_enduring_2008;
@hayles_how_2012]. The analysis of the computational metaphor brings attention
to the gravity of the situation. Simulated text appears to us in the guise of
the print metaphor. By such means one system of symbolic exchange is subsumed
by another. We would like to believe, with Lubbock and Benjamin, in the power
of literary analysis to construct a bridge from ideation to material context:
from thought to thing, from novel to book, from words and sentences to shape
and design. But the simulation seals the diegetic, intra-textual world within
the device, further obscuring the relationship between the book as an idea and
the book as an object and a commodity. To mistake the illusion of print for
print prevents us from the already difficult task of examining the
particulates of received technological inheritance: "to scrutinize the
patterns that technics give to life, and to make new choices on the basis of
that critique" [@winner_autonomous_1978, 83].

Habit hides the peculiarity of our everyday interfaces with the digital word.
We read at the surface; we etch inscriptions deep within the bowels of a
machine. When enacted on the level of the physical device, formal estrangement
and interruption parallels the practice of exegesis in literary analysis. The
unpacking of literal devices that produce meaning reveals internals that
structure the reading experience made opaque through artifice and habituation.
It is at this outer level of analysis, the formalist concern with literary
technique as a system of symbolic exchange intersects with the political
concern with the technics of the book as a token exchanged on the commodities
market.

It is tempting to think of personal computers as glorified calculators. That
is often the popular image of computing, one that highlights the machine's
ability to calculate. The computer reduces culture to ones and zeroes (or so
goes the story), thereby diminishing the human experience.[^ln1-pop] There is
some truth to that position, but I would like to argue here that the
connection between computing and calculation is but a piece of a larger story.
Personal computers which govern the production of textuality today emerged
from an amalgamation of programmable machines: among them the telegraph, the
typewriter, and the calculator. Add to that list looms, music boxes, radios,
and film cameras [^ln1-ceruzzi]. These machines too left an imprint on our
everyday engagement with computational devices. The electronic book is
undoubtedly in part also a kind of a computer. But the computer also retains
traces of its literary history.

It is important to keep the intertwined material lineages of computation in
mind because each brings with it a different set of practices, values, and
priorities. As complex computational systems continue to play an ever greater
part in our lives, from affecting family relations to health and nutrition
(think social media and personal activity trackers), we are increasingly faced
with a host of conflicting choices. When building digital architectures that
are also social systems, should we privilege notions of agency or efficiency,
privacy or connectivity, elegance or complexity? These are not choices that
can be understood in purely instrumental terms. They are values external to
system architecture. The question then becomes one of ends and means. A
calculator is most efficient when operating on binary data; efficiency and
complexity are goods for the task of calculation. Humans prefer to manipulate
texts and images instead of binary data; keeping documents in simple,
human-readable formats answers the values of systematic transparency and
sustainability. What values are embodied in the electronic book? The passive
voice and our inability to answer the question directly points to the root of
the problem.

