### Microanalysis 

The Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC),
the organization responsible for the controversial Common Core standards being
implemented in schools across the United States today, promotes close reading
as "thorough," "methodical," and "analytical" practice that "enables students
to reflect on the meanings of individual words and sentences; the order in
which sentences unfold; and the development of ideas over the course of the
text, which ultimately leads students to arrive at an understanding of the
text as a whole" [@parcc_parcc_2012, 7]. The general movement here is from
"text" on the page to "work" (text as a whole, in the language of the report).
The model of textuality implicit in the institutional project of close reading
assumes an environment of received literary canons, naturally accessible to
the human intellect. For the duration of the "Gutenberg galaxy," the age of
print, a well-educated person might have been expected to internalize some
several hundred or perhaps thousands of major texts constituting the canon.
Close reading was honed to operate on that naturalized scale.

That poet's dude's impossible to read.

The expansion of the textual field has radically increased the cognitive
demands of literary engagement. The pipeline between text and work has
lengthened considerably. On the one side, the matter of canon formation can no
longer be relegated to stable, long-term systems of social filtering. Seen
from the perspective of a literary interface, the database, the social stream,
and the search engine are tools for dynamic, "on the fly," generative
canon-formation. Consider the task of finding an unknown (to me) factoid
online, about philosophy in the times of Andalusian Spain, for example. Where
in the past I might have started with a subject catalog compiled by
librarians, today I construct a search query, using resources that I believe
will return a reasonably authoritative list of texts on the subject. The
search engine, in effect, replaces (or rather complements) centuries-long
processes of canon-formation. A near-instantaneous list of results now becomes
my ephemeral, but nevertheless authoritative, collection of relevant
literature.

Each text in the returned list still requires the instrumentation of close,
analytical interpretation. However, the same discipline of critical and
reflective deliberation exercised on the level of an individual text needs to
also be exercised on the level of procedurally generated search engine
results: Where to search? Using what engine? How to construct the query? What
are the implicit biases of the system?  The academic question of
canon-formation transforms into a (not yet critical) practice of rapid,
iterative, generative canon-making. Whatever ideals motivate close reading
between "text" and "work" surely must drive the process on the level of
dynamic corpus composition.

The various practices of distant reading arise from the condition in which
canons are no longer accessible, in their entirety, to the unaided (natural)
human intellect. These include distant reading and macroanalysis in literary
studies [@jockers_macroanalysis_2013; @moretti_distant_2013], culturomics in
economy [@aiden_uncharted:_2014], e-discovery in law
[@scheindlin_electronic_2004; @scheindlin_electronic_2009], automatic essay
evaluation in education [@shermis_handbook_2013], and medical informatics in
medicine [@shortliffe_biomedical_2013], among others. At the foundations of
these nascent disciplines is a shared toolkit of statistical natural language
processing [@manning_foundations_1999; @jurafsky_speech_2008], automatic
summarization [@radev_centroid-based_2004; @nenkova_pyramid_2007], machine
learning [@rasmussen_gaussian_2006; @flach_machine_2012], network analysis
[@opsahl_node_2010; @szell_measuring_2010; @takhteyev_geography_2012], and
topic modeling [@wallach_topic_2006; @blei_probabilistic_2012].

Where distant reading perceives patterns across large-scale corpora,
microanalysis breaks literary systems down to their minute constituent
components.

![Micro, macro, and close reading.](images/micro.png)

Where distant reading and macroanalysis constitute the study of mediation
between readers and text aggregates (like canons, corpora, collections,
libraries, archives, and database) microanalysis examines mediation at the
level of physical minutiae otherwise not readily observed in cursory
exploration. The instruments of microanalysis may coincide with computational
tools, designed to find hidden patterns lurking above or beneath a given
document.[^ln2-iarkho] The micro-instrumentation might also include a
screwdriver, a binding needle, or a soldering iron: sharp tools that help to
pry open and to scrutinize otherwise magical textual black boxes.

### Changing conditions

