# Chapter 5: Control

End with unmediated thought !!!


## Simulation

Turing's *Computing Machinery and Intelligence*

"But if thinking consists only in writing or speaking, why shouldn't a machine
do it? Could a machine be in pain" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 17]?
Could it have internal states? "It is a travesty of the truth to say: thinking
is an activity of our mind, as writing is an activity of the
hand" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 17].

Wittgenstein's conversations with Turing about the ways by which physical
states pass into the symbolic ones and the other way around, prefigure the
operation of the universal Turing machine. The Turing machine occupies exactly
the described ambiguous state between symbol and mechanism.

This line of questioning was certainly already familiar to those students of
Wittgenstein who attended his earlier lectures at Cambridge, and who
undoubtedly have participated in his reading-related thought experiments.
Wittgenstein's reading and calculating machines were meant to challenge the
very notions of reading and calculating.

Turing returned to the problem of machine and human intelligence explicitly
[@turing_computing_1950]. Here, Turing proposes to reformulate Wittgenstein's
original question (Can machines think?) into what he calls the "imitation
game." The format would surely please his former professor: three people---a
man, a woman, and an interrogator of either sex---would communicate by
teletype. The object of the game for the interrogator is to determine the
gender of the individual behind the screen. The object of the game for the
other two participants is to fool the interrogator. And here is the twist: the
part of one of the participants (not the interrogator) would be played by a
machine.

The question "Can a machine think?" becomes then, "Will the interrogator decide
wrongly as often when the game is played like this as he does when the game is
played between a man and a woman?" [@turing_computing_1950, 433]. The striking
transposition of the cognitive activity (thinking) into its functional
discursive equivalent (misrepresenting one's identity in writing) echoes
Wittgenstein's playful thought experiments. The machine that thinks is a
machine that tells tall-tales. On this view, a convincing imitation of thought
is thought. We would simply not be able to prove otherwise, without peeking
behind the teletype screen to see who or what is doing the typing. In that
sense, Turing returns to Wittgenstein's refusal to locate the mark of the
cognitive within any given organ or activity. Thought is simply that which
looks (sounds, reads) like thought---it is a game that we play, and a game that
could conceivably be played by other entities, mechanical or otherwise. For our
purposes, it is interesting to note that Turing's chat-bot does not simply
compute or calculate.  It is a literary machine. It does not just imitate human
logic or speech.  Instead, it imitates (performs!) fibbing. It is able to
imagine a fictional story about an alternative identity, and ultimately to
convince its reader of the story's veracity.

In the shift from the cognitive to the discursive, Turing follows the
trajectory of Wittgenstein's thought experimentation. Moreover, the game is
tinged with distinctly sexual overtones, and in the context of an
interrogation. It is a game in which winning means transgressing either one's
gender or one's species, all the while maintaining a straight face. The
proposed language game is not simply conversational, it is suspenseful and
subversive, having the force of a mystery, a detective novel, or a legal
drama. At one point of the essay Turing answers what he calls "the argument
from consciousness," quoting one Professor Jefferson in saying that it is not
"until a machine can write a sonnet or compose a concerto because of thoughts
and emotions felt, and not by the chance fall of symbols, could we agree that
machine equals brain---that is, not only write it but know that it had written
it. No mechanism could feel (and not merely artificially signal, an easy
contrivance) pleasure at its successes, grieve when its valves fuse, be warmed
by flattery, be made miserable by its mistakes, be charmed by sex, be angry or
depressed when it cannot get what it wants" [@turing_computing_1950, 446].

In response Turing scripts the following conversation: 

> Interrogator: In the first line of your sonnet which reads 'Shall I compare
thee to a summer's day' would not 'a spring day' do as well or better?

> Witness: It would not scan.

> Interrogator: How about 'a winter's day.' That
would scan all right.

> Witness: Yes, but nobody want to be compared to a
winter's day.

> Interrogator: Would you say Mr.  Pickwick reminded you of Christmas?

> Witness: In a way.

> Interrogator: Yet Christmas is a winter's day, and I do not think
Mr. Pickwick would mind the comparison.

> Witness: I don't think you're serious.
By a winter's day one means a typical winter's day, rather than a special one
like Christmas [@turing_computing_1950, 447].

Add Plato. Reading is proper internalization. Interpretation is the scanned
symbol + state of the machine.

Literature as imitation game == mimesis, simulation.

[^ln1-chinese]: This line is a likely source for John Searle's famous "Chinese
Room" experiment [@searle_minds_1980].

[^ln1-enigma]: See the enigmatic fragment on @wittgenstein_remarks_1978, 372.

Tie to the first two chapters. Easy multiplicity of documents.  Digitality as
something imposed from without or imposed on us! Because the book is different
it fucks with authenticity.

The possibility of text that reconfigures itself.


Although much of contemporary popular discourse on computation speaks the
language of disruption, the history of computational symbolism, of the sort I
am suggesting here, must be seen as an evolutionary trajectory.



## Engineering for Dissent

The vast machinery that brings literature to life hides from the reader's view.
Literature conceals. Even on the level of stylistics, writing well is meant to
evoke a sense of ease where it is usually the product of painstaking labor. Let
us hold on to that intuition for the duration of this chapter: writing conceals
labor.

