Recondite Surfaces

Plan:

1. Posit a thesis that addresses a problem in the theory of electronic texts.
2. Briefly describe the two positions that lead to differing and opposing
intuitions about the nature of digital text (and digital media in general).
3. Draw a short history of digital storage media.

A note about the format of the talk: This is a work in progress, a part of my
forthcoming book called Plain Text: The Poetics of Human--Computer
Interaction. I would appreciate any and all input. I will read and stop to
expand when necessary. Please feel free to interrupt! I am here to hear your
candid response.

I start by appealing to your intuitions in asking a seeming simple question:
where does the electronic text reside? Now it is a *seemingly* simple
question, because the answer is not at all obvious. On a page, we can
definitively point to the ink embedded into paper. On the screen the question
itself is ambiguous. In some sense the inscription is visible here on the
screen. But we know also that is not: it disappears when the machine is
powered off. It is an ephemeral location. In another sense, the inscription is
embedded into other, recondite surfaces: the oxide layer and the floating
gate, solid state storage media. The language belies remote and unfamiliar but
concrete physicalities. We will attempt to reconcile these two sites of
inscription today: the inscription at the site of projection, the screen, and
the same inscription at the site of storage, the archive, the hard drive.

<!-- read from the text a bit -->

I do not trust the text appearing before my eyes. Wendy Hui Kyong Chun calls
magnetic storage the "enduring ephemeral," which "creates unforeseen
degenerative links between humans and machines" [@chun_enduring_2008, 148]. If
the floating gate transistor,[^ln2-gate] where my text now lives, can be called
the enduring ephemeral, I will call my liquid crystal display, where the text
shows itself, fading persistence. This is not to believe that digital text can
transcend its material contexts. Only that it seems to drift from surface to
surface, beyond the field of vision, in ways that erode trust in the general
permanence of the literary system. If we are destined to dwell on surfaces, I
do not know to which surface to attach my attention: the screen or the floating
gate.

Once we see the digital document in all of its forms for what it is, a
computational device, we can begin to come to terms with the simulated nature
of screen textuality. Ask yourself a simple question: Where does text reside?
In print, one can point to the page and be fairly certain of the answer: here,
on the page. Computation complicates matters significantly. One can point to
the screen, yet it would not be enough to say that the text *is* there. The
screen remains in flux. It is a site of temporary projection. The projection
emanates from the storage medium within, passing through multiple filters and
transformations on the way to the screen. We therefore observe the figure
stretch before us across at least two sites of inscription. The sign stretches
and splits, expressed in the configuration of magnetic pulse and circuit state
at one end and in the phases of liquid crystal on screen at the other. Both
locations afford distinct constraints to reading, writing, and interpretation.
Consider that reading means one thing at this surface, and another at this
one.

Thus when Michael Heim refers to the "ephemeral quality" of the electronic
text or when Pamela McCorduck describes it as "impermanent, flimsy, malleable,
[and] contingent" they identify real-world attributes of digital inscription,
at the site of its projection. Conversely, when scholars like Johnna Drucker,
Katherine Hayles, and Matthew Kirschenbaum respond to Heim and company with
hardened materialism, they are also rightly describing properties of digital
inscription, but this time at the site of its archival immanence. The two
camps disagree because they speak neither of the same phenomenon nor at the
same site. The former group notices the ephemeral, transcendent state of the
projected word. The latter points instead to the "uniquely indelible nature of
magnetic storage" [@kirschenbaum_mechanisms_2008], to "drives, tapes, and
disks" as the "fundamental physical support" and "material substrates of
computing" [@drucker_performative_2013]. The hard drive and the screen
partition the sign between surface and depth, projection and archive.

<!-- affordances, what can be done with -->

The seeming immateriality of digital media entails real-world effects: the
costs of replication plummet, for example. Computational text can be copied
effortlessly, with minimal cost, and with near-perfect fidelity.
Hyper-reproducibility of the sort was unthinkable for most of the twentieth
century. The machine allows for rapid remediation. Lowered costs of copying
further reduce barriers to access and conveyance. Symbols that adhere lightly
to their medium are easy to store and to transport. Witness the rise of
massive, global public knowledge projects like online search engines and
encyclopedias as a direct consequence. Such projects follow by the logic of
immateriality, which moves towards totalizing archives and universal
accessibility.[^ln1-google] When representation appears to weigh nothing, one
imagines a weightless totality of all representation, available immediately
and everywhere. The perceived weightlessness of text has other side-effects as
well. For example, a text that adheres lightly to its medium is also difficult
to contain, making onerous the governance of symbolic representation and
weakening traditional controls like the dissemination of texts censorship and
intellectual property rights regimes.

Yet, despite the appearances, the sign does not and cannot exist in a vacuum.
Rather, the symbol splits in two: with one half arising visibly, a weightless
and apparent screen simulation, and the other half, opaque, etched into the
hefty and hidden material contingencies of the device. The material substrates
of computational text likewise carry real-world affordances and consequences.
They are first and foremost hidden from view. Drives and tapes reside inside
plastic and aluminum boxes. If only because they carry electrical current and
have the potential to catch fire, they are regulated. <!--- there is a little
FCC statement somewhere ---> They contain heavy and rare metals, often
hazardous if touched or ingested. A part of the sign is thus sealed in
miniaturized containers that prevent access and to resist tempering. These are
but some of the realities of computed <!-- digital elextronic --> text. It is
text intertwined with machine internals and control codes and it is often
hermeneutically sealed to resist human interpretation.

Form and content lie flat on the printed page. Print interfaces are paper
thin, we might say. Ink adheres to paper in the way that pixels do not to
screens. The splintered sign complicates the traditional structuralist
distinctions between form and content. It occupies at least two distinct
sites, each entailing drastically differing capabilities for reading, writing,
and interpretation. Were we to untangle the tightly wound coil of the circuit,
we would find ample distance between the hard drive and the screen. Where
print is flat, computed text resides at several levels and along multiple
dimensions.[^ln2-hayles]

<!--- 8-12 MIN literal distance, a few inches to a few thousand miles, data is
in china the signal travels --->

How did this multiplicity come to be? In the conclusion of the talk I would
like to suggest a history of electronic inscription, which proceed in three
stages. And I would like to tell a quick story based on the following three
devices, three snapshots from a much longer history, three configurations of
storage media.

A. "You must acknowledge that this is readable without special training," reads
the caption to a schematic illustration for a "controller," patented by H.E.
Goldberg in 1911. "My invention relates to all controllers," Goldberg writes.
The object of Goldberg's controller was "to provide a mechanism operable by a
control sheet which is legible to every person having sufficient education to
enable him to read." Goldberg illustrates his invention in attaching to his
patent "a control sheet in which the control characters are in the form of the
letters of the ordinary English alphabet" [@goldberg_controller_1915]. Rather
than using ticker tape, Goldberg proposed the use of perforations that while
capable of actuating machine levers also formed letters. To counteract the
unintelligibility of code, Goldberg imagines using cards, perforated in the
shape of the English alphabet.  Thus besides carrying human-readable content,
Goldberg's cards did "double duty" to mechanically manipulate the machine's
"blocks," "handles," "terminal blades," and "plungers"
[@goldberg_controller_1915].

On Goldberg's control sheets, the language of machines and the language of
humans coincided on one and the same plane, but only for a time. Magnetic
tape, mute and inscrutable, soon replaced punch card and ticker tape as the
preferred medium for data storage.

B. Magnetic Tape (Storage)

Magnetic tape changed the nature of the commitment between inscription and
medium. A typist using the new generation of magnetically-enabled devices
could manipulate words "in memory," on a medium that could be easily erased
and rewritten. The magnetic charge adhered lightly to tape surface. The "light
touch" of the magnetic inscription gave the word its ephemeral quality. But it
was also light enough as to be nearly imperceptible. In applications like law
and banking, where the fidelity between input, storage, and output were
absolutely crucial, the illegible property of magnetic storage posed a
significant engineering challenge. After the advent of teletype, but before
the screen, machine-makers employed a variety of mechanisms to restore a
measure of congruence between invisible magnetic inscription and visible paper
representation. Speaking at the 1967 symposium on electronic composition in
printing, Jon Haley, staff director of the Congressional Joint Committee on
printing, put it this way: "compromises with legibility [...] had been made
for the sake of pure speed in composition and dissemination of the end product
[@technology_electronic_1967, 48].

<!-- you are writing blind in a sense -->

C. Screen

Humans reading and writing on magnetic media with the aid of the screen for
the first time reported a feeling of freedom and liberation from paper. An
anonymous account included in Engelbart's report offers the following
phenomenological self-assessment:[^ln2-follow]

```
    1B4A "I find that I write faster and more freely,

        1B4A1 "pouring thoughts and trial words on the
        screen with much less inhibition,

        1B4A2 "finding it easy to repair mistakes or wrong
        choices

            1B4A22 "so while capturing a thought I don't
            have to inhibit the outpouring of thought and
            action to do it with particular correctness,

        1B4A3 "finding that several trials at the right
        wording can be done very quickly

            1B4A3A "so I can experiment, easily take a look
            and see how a new version strikes me--and often
            the first unworried attempt at a way to express
            something turn out to be satisfactory, or at
            least to require only minor touch up.

        1B4A4 "Finding that where I might otherwise
        hesitate in search of the right word, I now pour out
        a succession of potentially appropriate words,
        leaving them all the while the rest of the
        statement takes shape. Then I select from among
        them, or replace them all, or else merely change the
        list a it and wait for a later movement of the
        spirit.
```

The passage between the pixel and the floating gate, the screen and the hard
drive draws attention to the differences in the material affordances of each
medium. Technology does not determine the literary space: it has only the
potential to hide implicit mechanisms of machine control, or, to offer
possibilities for transformation not otherwise available to other forms of
textuality. Loosely coupled to its material contexts, in this bifurcated mode,
text can continue its relentless drive from matter to idea and into other
matters as long as its passage is not hampered by regimes that prohibit
further sharing, remixing, and transmediation. We are constrained somewhere
between the hard drive and the screen. I say nothing yet of the potential
necessity of such constraint. Under certain conditions, in the name of
privacy, security, or property rights, it may become necessary to flatten text
out and to treat text as more of an analog, media-bound modality of
communication, limited in its ability to move across minds and cultures. But,
it is also in our broadly human, civic interest to keep such mechanisms of
constraint visible to view, under continual scrutiny of critical, close, and
closest possible reading.
