
Recall in this regard the Heideggerian insight into the mediated nature of
tool use. In *Being and Time*, Heidegger wrote about the particular
*handiness* of a tool, like a hammer. He writes, "the less we stare at the
thing [...] the more actively we use it, the more original our relation to it
becomes and the more undisguisedly it is encountered as what it is, a useful
thing" [@heidegger_being_1996, 65]. For Heidegger, a tool like a hammer had to
be understood through use. It was inaccessible to reason, reflection, or
theory alone. The hammer comes into focus through what he called
*circumspection* [*Umsicht*]---the peripheral awareness of the object
ready-to-hand [*zuhanden*] [@heidegger_sein_1967, 69]. We relate to the tool
in the process of manipulating it, while we concentrate on the task at hand:
the seamster is not interested in the needle, only in the work of sewing
[@heidegger_being_1996, 65]. Later, Heidegger would connect his account of
tool use with philosophy itself, as a mode of truth seeking or unconcealment
[@heidegger_question_1977, 319]. When used properly, the tool reveals some
truth about the world, about itself, and about the person using it. In this
sense the Greek *techne* is for Heidegger related to *poiesis*, or bringing
forth. Contrary to the kind of technology that reveals and brings forth,
Heidegger describes also the use of machines and apparatus that conceals and
blocks poiesis. Such tools determine rather than reveal in the sort of a
"destined" revealing that can unfold only along a predetermined narrative, in
which the answer is already given. The forester that walks the woods simply to
cut them down can only reveal its nature as a commodity, in what Heidegger
calls a "standing reserve." The forester who measures the felled timber
becomes subordinate to the organization of cellulose. The wood is challenged
forth by the need of paper, the paper to the press. The press consequently
organizes the public, set on "swallowing what is printed, so that a set
configuration of opinion becomes available on demand." In following the path
of a determined narrative, technology turns the human into a human resource.
It is in that sense, that Heidegger concludes that modern technology is "no
more a human doing" [@heidegger_question_1977, 323-4]. Ultimately, proscribed
tool use strips users of their powers of self-determination. They can learn
nothing new about themselves or the world.

Direct manipulation similarly frustrates the Heideggerian vision of
technology that reveals. At hand, the device takes shape as a keyboard, a
mouse, or a touch screen. But in the mind, as a simulation, it dissembles to
behave similar to page, a folder, or a wastepaper bin. The tool---a keyboard
or a touch screen---is not encountered for what it is. Nor does a simulated
tool reveal anything about the material it affects. The simulation produces
knowledge neither about the thing being simulated (paper or books, for
example) nor about the medium giving rise to the simulation (computational
device, in our example).
