# Part III: Displacement
## Chapter 6: Labor

Estrangement vs. alienation.

Finally, I would like to extend computational
formalism towards its speculative and as yet unrealized edge cases.

In conclusion, we will consider the possibility of literature without
language, discourse without structure, and art without representation.  ##
Copy

This property further had the effect of freeing digital representation from
its medium. A Rembrandt is bound to its canvas in a way that Shakespeare's
*Hamlet* is not.  Digital systems are media independent. *Hamlet* can be
reproduced on paper or stone, in Morse code, or bound in liquid crystal, and
still be *Hamlet* in some natural understanding of the work.

The division of text into form and content makes a difference in more
utilitarian ways as well. For example, imagine the challenge of compiling all
known commentaries on Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, by hand or programmatically. The
problem of what edition to use as the "base" for such a project presents
itself immediately. In the words of Barbara Mowat and Paul Werstine, the
editors of *Folger Digital Texts*, "readers assume that there is a single text
for the plays: what Shakespeare wrote. But Shakespeare's plays were not
published the way modern novels or plays are today: as a single, authoritative
text. In some cases, the plays have come down to us in multiple published
versions, represented by various Quartos (Qq) and by the great collection put
together by his colleagues in 1623, called the First Folio (F). There are, for
example, three very different versions of *Hamlet*, two of *King Lear*, *Henry
V*, *Romeo and Juliet*, and others. Editors choose which version to use as
their base text, and then amend that text with words, lines or speech prefixes
from the other versions that, in their judgment, make for a better or more
accurate text" [@mowat_textual_2012]. In other words, where the readers expect
to encounter *Hamlet* as a single, unified idea, they instead encounter a
multiplicity of slightly diverging textual "witnesses." Errors in
transcription and editorial interventions accumulate. The proliferation of
unlicensed copies, translations, and imitations further adds to the complexity
of the problem.

Editors of classical literature will often solve the problem of diverging
copies by designating one version as canonical, preserving the formal
characteristics of the given version down to individual line breaks, as is
often done with Platonic dialogs. It then becomes possible to collate
commentaries, connecting each to individual words and passages at their
canonical location. The problem remains in the abstract: which version to
count as canonical? The act of deciding on what constitutes an authoritative
edition can quickly become a contentious issue, particularly when the text in
question carries religious or political significance.

A whole field of textual criticism exists in the service of negotiating
"critical" editions which in some way preserve the struggle to reconstruct a
measure of authority. But what should count for being authoritative? A number
of logical possibilities find as many ardent adherents. For some, the act of
deriving the authoritative text lies in reconstructing authorial intent, using
the author's notes, for example, or from first-hand witness testimony. Others
place a premium on reconstructing and analyzing the writing process itself, in
what has been dubbed as "genetic criticism" [@deppman_genetic_2004, 1-36]. Yet
another approach will compare multiple editions of the same text to derive a
possible meta-text, preserving all extant variations. Yet others will simply
rely on their judgment to produce what they believe is a "true" text based on
a number of personal and eclectic considerations [@bowers_rationale_1950,
@bowers_shakespeares_1954, @mcgann_radiant_2001]. Such approaches to textual
criticism have at least this one thing in common: behind the fuzzy profusion
of textual material they perceive the outlines of a single, unified work. As
G.  Thomas Tanselle (a prominent textual scholar) puts it, "one must be able
to distinguish the work itself from attempts to reproduce it."[^ln11-tanselle]
For a textual critic of his kind, all real-word variants and reproductions are
suspect because possibly corrupt in some way. Despite its careful attention to
the materiality of the text as artifact, textual criticism in this vein
remains a classically idealistic pursuit. The work exists as an ideal form in
the realm of the ideal.

[ln11-tanselle]:  "Whatever concept of authorship one subscribes to, the act
of reading or listening to receive a message from the past entails the effort
to discover, through the text (or texts) one is presented with, the work that
lies behind" [@tanselle_rationale_2010, 13-18.].

Restoration and Anti-restoration. Eugene-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc (for) and
William Morris and John Ruskin (against). Also Teoria del restaruo by Brandi.

"To restore an edifice means neither to maintain it, nor to repair it, not to
rebuild it; it means to reestablish it in a finished state, which may in fact
never have actually existed at any given time." [@price_historical_1996, 314;
orig from @viollet-le-duc_foundations_1990, 195]

"It is for all these buildings, threfore, of all times and styles, that we
plead, and call upon those who hve to deal with them to put Protection in the
place of Restoration, to stave off decay by daily care, to prop a perilous
wall or mend a leaky roof by such means as are obvioiusly mant for support or
convering, and show no pretence of other art, and othrwise to resist all
tampering with either the favric or ornament of the buildings as it stands; if
it has become 

But whose who make the change wrout in our day under the name of Restoration,
while professing to bring back a building to the best time of its hisory, have
no guide but each his own individual whim to point out to them what i s
admirable and what contemptible; while the very nature o their task compels
them to destroy something and to supply the gap by imagining what the earlier
builders should or might have done." Data munging. Irreversible changes.
@price_historical_1996, 320; orig in "William Morris, "The Principles of the
Society as Set Forth Upon its Foundation," Builder 35 August 1877.

Ruskin lamp of memory.

"It is impossible, as impossible as to raise the dead, to restore anything
that has every been great or beautiful in architecture [...] That spirit which
is given only by the hand and eye of the workman, never can be recalled.
Another spirit may be given by another time, an it is then a new building; but
the spirit of the dead workman cannot be summoned up, and commanded to direct
other hands, and other thoughts. And as for direct and simple copying, it is
palpably impossible. What copying can there be of surfaces that have been worn
half an inch down [@staniforth_historical_2013, 2]?"

"But it is said there may come a necessity for restoration! Granted. Look the
necessity full in the face and understand it on its own terms. It is a
necessity for destruction. Accept it as such, pull the building down, throw
its stones into neglected corners, make ballast of them, or mortar, if you
will' but do it honestly, and do not set up a Lie in its
place"[@staniforth_historical_2013, 3].

On the Restoration of The Circumcision by Signorelli. "At Volterra, over the
alter of a Company in the Church of S. Francesco, he painted in fresco the
Circumcision of Our Lord, which in considered beautiful to a marvel, although
the Infant, having been injured by damp, was restored by Sodoma and made much
less beautiful than before. And, in truth, it would be sometimes better to
leave works half spoilt, when they have been made by men of excellence, rather
than to have them retouched by inferior masters." 1550 Tim's Vermeer.

picture cleaning as removing as removal of "varnishes and other encrustations,
by which a paininting may be obscured, but by which it is usulaly also in some
measur protected from injury." [@bomford_issues_2004, 60] Original in the
Report from the Select Committee on the National Gallery, London 1853, vi-xi.

Colliveau set about [restoring]this picture with uncommon solenity, because it
was his own. He began with the most delicate pumice stone, and very soon got
into the walls of th building, but was astonished to find the apearance of
bricks and mortar still, although not guite soneat; he soon cleared away the
wall on discovering a room beyond, and pictures, furniture, &c. most
beautiful.  Gracious powers! how was he agitated; forgetting totally the
mischief he was commiting, his elbow went like a fiddler's; every thing
vanished.---However, finding a bed, the curtains of which (a dark green) were
drawn close, he went to work upon it ver tenderly; presently a pot de chambre
came  in sight!---His whole souldwas absorbed; his face all one ghastly grin;
his legs (like German flutes) tottered under him. Not that great philosopher
Guffin Ragba, was more agitated while cutting the leather from off his bellow,
to disover how wind was make, than was Monsieru Collifeau while scroring off
the bed cloaths; at last he found a lady asleep, very beautiful, because very
fat, and a Dutch woman.  Now this part I did not see, and I believe but very
few besides himself; but alas! hew was soon to be at the end of his
discoveries. Having got a glimpse of some gilding, he redoubled his efforts,
when he found it was an inscription; it was in Dutch, and nearly thus, as
translated by Mr. Peter La Cave:---"Now caitiff, meditate on th havoc though
hast made throughout thy lie, and go thang thyself. In this picture, wretch!
though have destroyed, what to the end of the world, can never be replaced."
[@bomford_issues_2004, 44-45]. Originally from Julio Caesar Ibbetson, An
Accidence, or Gamut, of Painting in Oil and water Colous . London: Darton and
Harvey, 1803, 5-14.

"The sculptor wastes away th rudo block til he has accomplished the desired
form. not so the painter. he builds up his forms from a blank surface, and
hides, as he rogresses all the preliminary layers upon which the etxternal
colours depend for durability and lustre. And hence, not on the meaning and
spririt of the work must be understood; the restorer must also be familiar
with he naure of the materials and the manner of their employment.
[@bomford_issues_2004, 70]. Original from @merritt_dirt_1854, 67-72


The wound that heals.

Just giving you a taste of restoration vs. preservation. What would


[^ln11-counter]: A documentary on counterfeit goods produced by BBC4
interviews Christophe Zimmerman, Senior Technical Officer at World Customs
Organization, who deplores the industry's lack of cooperation with law
enforcement [@bbc4_counterfeiting_2013].


## Gerard Genette and Nelson Goodman on the nature of textual copies,
## 2.5 Marx upside down

It is this last and still current moment of historical development that is
least theorized. A dominant tradition in the history of the human sciences
follows Louis Althusser and Michel Foucault (and, to a lesser extent, Jacques
Derrida)[^ln1-derr] in analyzing mechanisms of structure and control in terms
of ideology, discourse, and representation. Where for Althusser "every science
is a science of ideology,"[^ln1-alt] Foucault posits his archeology of the
human sciences on the level of "positive unconscious," revealing unspoken
"rules" that govern the formation of "theories, concepts, and objects of study"
on the level of "scientific representation" [@foucault_order_1994, xi].

There are a number of theoretical niceties here (that the reader may skip, if
not interested in the history of Marxist thought). For example, the concept of
ideology, in the orthodox Marxist schema of things, exists as a "political
superstructure [...] to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness." In the Marxist model, ideology floats *above* the material
base---the dominant mode of production---that "determines the general character
of the social, political and spiritual processes of life"
[@marx_contribution_1904, 11]. Althusser's influential contribution to this
world view was to insist that ideology, although secondary to the mode of
production, nevertheless assures its continual reproduction as a means of
continuing subjugation and political control. Simply put, for Althusser, the
ideological apparatus of the modern capitalist state ends up being "installed
in the dominant [social] position" [@althusser_lenin_2001, 85-127]. In a
similar (although not equivalent) rhetorical move, Foucault envisions that
beneath the "epistemological level" of human activity there exists an
"archaeological layer," where representation "governs the mode of being of
language, individuals, nature, and need itself" [@foucault_order_1994, 209].
Ideology and representation, once determined, now determine. The rhetorical
jujitsu inverts Hegel yet again, to put Marx back on his head.[^ln1-flip] My
short history of the universal Turing machine runs counter to this top-heavy
tradition of reading Marx in the inverse. As a device, the Turing machine fuses
control and communication. Control is meant here bluntly, as physical circuit
control, at the level of the mechanism and not at the attenuated level of
ideology or representation.


John Eberhard from the Institute of Applied Technology, National Bureau of
Standards speaking in 1967 at the Electronic Composition in Printing symposium
at Gaithersburg Laboratories.

@technology_electronic_1968, 1

I happen to be a humanist among the physical scientists here at the National
Bureau of Standards. Begins with a quote from Marshall McLuhan. "He who does
his work like a machine, grows a heart like a machine in his breast, and he who
carries a heart of the machine in his breast losses his simplicity. He who has
lost his simplicity, becomes unsure of the strivings of his soul."

"It is a long way from standards like the alphabet to standards like privacy
with the respect to the use of computers."

"We are concerned not only with nuts and bolts and screw threads or with the
standards related to the phenomena of matter and materials. We are becoming
increasingly concerned about man and about how man becomes a part of this
measuring system" [2].

Heidegger would be good here.

Media

### 5.3 Fanon + arendt

### 5.4 Freedom of Information

Engelbart's lab adopted a conspicuously recursive methodology they called
"bootstrapping," by which research into creating better research was done by
enabling research [@engelbart_research_1968, 395]. Elsewhere, Engelbart
explains bootstrapping "as a process wherein the results of a given effort are
fed back into the activity in a reinforcing way, so that less internal energy
is required to achieve bigger results faster." In that light, the production of
the technical report quoted here was not an activity incidental and secondary
to research, but was the stated object of research itself.

"A short computer program that is permanently resident or easily loaded into a
computer and whose execution brings a larger program, such as an operating
system or its loader, into memory" [@ieee_ieee_1990, 13].

"the techniques being explored are implemented, studies, and evaluated with the
advantage of intensive everyday use" [@engelbart_augmented_1973, 12].  Much
later, in the 1990s, Engelbar

"They must bootstrap themselves into a new kind of ``think,'' into a new climate
of man-machine interaction, in which men evolve intelligent machines and
intelligent machines evolve men" [@brodey_human_1967, 86].

Engelbart borrows the idea of "bootstrapping" from . The
animation of inorganic matter

the material g

Warren Brodey Human Enhancement

Start with the clock manifesto.

CONTOROL SECURITY FREEDOM
Freedom security consistency (Furby). Control. Freedom.

"To a book collector, you see, the true freedom of all books is somewhere on his
shelves" [@benjamin_unpacking_1968, 64].

Lita Furby, who wrote one of the earliest definitive literature reviews on the
subject in the 1970s, traces the origins of object-affect fusion to William
James. In the *Principles of Psychology* James writes about what he calls the
"empirical self," which comprises the unity of all that could be called me:

Attributes ideas of autonomous technology to a Thomas, Carlyle, Charles
Dickens, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry Thoreau, mark Twain,
Henry Adams, John Ruskin, William Morris, E. E. Cummings, George Orwell, Marcel
Duchamp, and Kurt Vonnegut.

"In one definition or another autonomous technology is now a significant
transdisciplinary hypothesis in the natural and social sciences, the arts,
journalism, and even the technical specialties themselves. But how can this
be" [@winner, 19].

Faustian spirit. Striving for control. "The proof of science is technology"
[@winner, 25]. What can you actually do?

Skepticism about technological agency in the face of "unintended" or "emergent"
side effects of complex systems. If fracking for natural gas contributes to the
increase of earthquakes, that does not mean that fracking somehow "has a mind"
to destroy humanity by earthquakes.

Hypomnesis. Galloway interface p. 16. Foucault.

Winner has it as noncomprehensibility instead of autonamism.


Cleartext in encryption. The Circle. PARITY of encryption.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch/wp/2015/06/04/fbi-official-companies-should-help-us-prevent-encryption-above-all-else/

The debate over encryption erupted on Capitol Hill again Wednesday, with an FBI
official testifying that law enforcement's challenge is working with tech
companies "to build technological solutions to prevent encryption above all
else."

Ethics and Aesthetics

James: the aesthetic function is one of negation. To create art is to sculpt
reality. Ethics is similar choice making [@james, 289].

Automonous technology. Exploring all possibilities at once. Must negate some.
That is ethics. James calls this the highest form: making choices. Where do
these choices come from? What guides development?

Humanism. Agency, delibiration, consensus, dissent.


for Dissent Agency. Deliberation. Consensus. Dissent. Dissent is the least
developed of these. Engineering for dissent. The ability to create shared goals
and to exit. engagement with shared project. The subject of my next book. 

Metaphysical Dread about Computation Brian Lennon and Golumbia. The argument
basically boils down to the cultural logic of computation being complicit in
the military industrial complex. That complicity manifests itself in a shared
set of tools. By that logic: the we should also condemn the libraries' efforts
to help up archive and store information. Condemn the poets for using metaphors
because these are also used in advertising. Something perverse about that: it
is as if we would worry about knowledge because knowledge is used for
mechanisms of control.

Deeper metaphysical dread about computation, that should be understood
historically (where Lennon gets it right). You are not a gadget.

phttp://www.ernestooroza.com/
Technological Disobedience

Creating SPACE. Physical space.

Yet, to make the subjective experience strange again is to look at it through
the eyes of a stranger. Makhail Bakhtin writes (in what I think is a previously
untranslated passage):

> It is not I who looks out from the inside, but I look at myself with the eyes
of the world, strange eyes; I am possessed by another. There is no integrity of
internal and external here. To glimpse my own preocular image. The naive
confluence of self and the other in the mirror image. The surplus of the other.
There is no point of view outside of myself; I cannot access my own internal
image. From my eyes stare a stranger's eyes [@"The Man by the Mirror," Mikhail
Bakhtin]

[^ln7-bakhtin]: I reproduce the passage here it its entirety: "Falsehood and
deception, unavoidably peering out of their own correlation. The external image
of thought, feeling, the external image of the soul. It is not I who looks out
from the inside, but I look at myself with the eyes of the world, strange eyes;
I am possessed by another. There is no integrity of internal and external here.
To glimpse my own preocular image. The naive confluence of self and the other
in the mirror image. The surplus of the other. There is no point of view
outside of myself; I cannot access my own internal image. From my eyes stare a
stranger's eyes." 

> The study, conducted by Lily Tsai, an associate professor of political science
at MIT, suggests that citizens who do not follow all the laws are engaging in
“constructive noncompliance” — acts that are intended to prompt the government
to alter its policies, without necessarily challenging its overall status.  
http://newsoffice.mit.edu/2015/citizens-disobey-enact-change-0519

### 6.2 Cryptography and Steganography Legibility

Ethics of legibility.

Hobbes on secret knowledge (p43-44!)

Where cryptography is the art of secret communication, steganography is the art
of hiding the secret. "The purpose of steganography is to hide the very
presence of communication by embedding messages into innocuous-looking objects,
such as digital images," Jessica Fridrich and her colleagues write for the
proceedings of the Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers,
appropriately shortened to SPIE [@fridrich_searching_2004].

The real danger comes not from a metaphysical source, but from the superficial
similarity of print and pixel. Where the pen or the typewriter inscribe the
image directly into their paper medium, digital type passes through a series of
transformations between the keystroke and its corresponding pulse of the
cathode ray, or in the flow of liquid crystal. Secrecy and surveillance
technologies that rightly worry Kittler exist in the gap between text as medium
and text as content. They threaten literature (the something to be said) only
in so far as the mechanisms of literary production (how it is said) remain
hidden from the critical view. When the veil is lifted, we can begin to reclaim
the passage of textuality. In this process, technology remains a relatively
neutral conduit, enabling liberation and oppression alike. The physical control
of expression cannot and should not be reduced to something as seemingly
self-contingent as "the conditions of high technology." Systems of control
naturally obscure the pathways of agency. Letting go of agency as a critical
concept plays into the hand of those (human agents) that benefit directly from
the illusion of disempowerment. I view "control" in that sense not as an
ideology, but as the ability to physically alter the material conditions of
literary production, dissemination, and consumption. The transition from
mechanical typewriter to electrical word processor precisely couples code as
content and code as control.  

### 7.1 ITU

Related to secrecy.  Encrypted literature. Revealment and dissimulation. Notions of textuality as
embroiled in contemporary ideas of privacy, secrecy, and transparency.
Computation does not necessarily work for the military-industrial apparatus (as
argued by Golumbia, Lennon, and McPherson).  Recovering and preserving
textuality in computing.

Brooks Act 1965.  Man in the middle attacks.

Alice, Bob, Caryl.
http://www.computerworld.com/article/2838775/why-google-wants-to-replace-gmail.html
Communication theory of secrecy systems, shannon

Zimmermann responded by publishing the source code as a book, an act that was
constitutionally protected as free speech. 

Plain text + fleas from the Unix book should go here.

IBM Format

By 1932 the ITU documents list two new standards, International Telegraphic
Alphabet No. 1 (ITA-1) and International Telegraphic Alphabet No. 2 (ITA-2).
The ITA formats, like the Baudot, represented latin characthers in a system of
fixed-lenght "bit" codes, For example, in ITA-1 the letter "A" and the number
"1" are both represented by `-++++`; "X" and "," by `+-++-`, and the "error"
code by `+++--` [@itu_telegraph_1932, 34]. Because the devices are not
synchronized, the pause between each transmitted character can vary in length.
For this reason ITA-2 includes two extra bits for indicating "start" and stop"
elements. The letter "A" and a hyphen in ITA-2 would be encoded as `0110001`,
where ones and zeros represent the absence and the presence of
current[@itu_telegraph_1932, 36].

By the 1960, multiple competing character encodings existed in the United
States and globally.

ASCII.
Plain text in Unix. Human readability. TROFF.

Further separation. On benefits of computer-aided document preparation. "The
style or format of the document can be decoupled from its content; the only
format control information that need be embedded is that describing textual
categories and boundaries, such as titles, section headings, paragraphs, and
the like [@kernighan_unix_1978, 2116]

Plain and fancy Text Unix system. What you see is not what you get. What is
plain text. Unix ideas of plain text. ASCII. From form and content to content,
semantic markup, and typesetting. Semantic markup as part of the
extra-linguistic meaning making.

http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr29/ The concept of Grapheme Clusters.

Semantic markup is interesting because it contains both material and ideal. The
way textuality is encoded mediates between idea and matter. Mediation. Visible
form and hidden form.

The theory of preaching. Lectures on homiletics (1892). Plain text vs. obscure
text.o

John Charles Ryle
Expository Thoughts on the Gospels: For Family and Private Use. With the ...

"One plain text is worth a thousand arguments."

Words: Their Use and Abuse
Say plain things in a plain way.

Time and truth reconciling the moral and religious world to Shakespeare: the
 By B. S. Naylor
"Thus it is, that the plain text, the obvious meaning, of Shakespeare, is
dostorted by Commentators and beclouded by Illustrators" (p64)

"One plain text is worth a thousand"

Signal Book, United States Army: 1916

### Cuts

"familiar with fabrication" "alienated objects" [@hegel_aesthetics:_1975,
2

The "symbolic" part is important in this context. For example, the universal
computing machine cannot emulate an internal combustion engine, because the
internal combustion engine is not in itself a symbolic machine. However, the
universal computing machine can emulate a symbolic representation of an
internal combustion engine: witness games like *Railroad Tycoon* or 61].
"things not dead or killed by custom" "his own production"
