Although the distinction between form and content is somewhat naturalized in
literary and linguistic discourse, the concept of form is also often used in
another way, which contradict the earlier sense set in opposition to meaning
and content. When we think of Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, for example, whatever is
meant by the "form" of the play belongs neither to its physical medium (pixel
or paper) nor to the ideational content of the work. Form, in that sense, lies
somewhere between the two worlds: it is in the shape of the letters, in the
structure of the narrative, and in the prosody of the word. We do not quite
know which of these elements belong to the content of the play and which are
the contingent material artifacts of the printing process: the way the fonts
look, for example, or the way lines break on the page. Some matters of form
matter to us as readers (line breaks), and others do not (font kerning). Three
things seem to be in play rather than two: matter, form, and content. And of
these, form sometimes falls into the category of meaningless matter and
sometimes into semantic-carrying ideation: form, the indeterminate.

textuality in which form bridges matter and content. The history of Western
aesthetics can be seen as pulling the work of art through one or several of
these layers of analysis: as when Susan Sontag entreats her reader to pay more
attention to form (as sensuous shape), or when Johanna Drucker asks her reader
to consider the materiality of text, or when Sharon Marcus writes about
reading for "what lies in plain sight." But the very words "matter," "form,"
and "content" often tangle in the conceptual confusion of texts that resist
being pinned down to any single stratum of interpretation. I am trying to
understand, for example, what Roland Barthes means by the distinction between
"work" and "text" in his seminal essay on textuality.[^ln4-barthes] For
Barthes, the work has something to do with paper, bookshelves, and, more
generally, substance. By contrast, text is something "radically symbolic,"
something that moves across works, not bound to any specific matter. Barthes's
"texts" sound like ideas, where his "works" sound like books. This usage
stands in direct opposition to the tradition of textual criticism, where
"source texts" stand for specific, materially-bound editions or manuscripts,
and "works" for the collective unity of the artistic vision: the idea of
Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, for example, in opposition to variance found in the
multiplicity of individual *Hamlets*.

Whereas Barthes wants to liberate text as symbol from the embodied work,
scholars like Johanna Drucker make a strong case for returning the text to its
underlying material contexts. Much of her work reminds the reader that ideas
cannot exist outside of their material form, that paper and typography are the
formal medium for the production of meaning in language, and that even
electronic, digital text formats have their material embodiment
[@drucker_digital_2001; @drucker_graphical_2006; @drucker_letterpress_2008;
@drucker_speclab_2009; @drucker_reading_2013]. I am sympathetic to the message,
but only in so far as it adds a dimension of materiality to a properly
three-dimensional, multi-layered, thick description of text.

A clarification of the terms and an understanding of form both as shape and
formula allows us to perceive the history of textual technology as one of the
gradual stratification between matter, form, and content. Textuality comes
unglued. This allographic property of text---its ability to "peel" away, to
change shape, and to dis-embed---is worthy of critical attention. I am not only
against the theoretical move to batten textuality down, but I think of such
attempts as practically and politically imprudent. The ephemerality of an
electronic text represents the hard-won struggle on the part of writers,
literary scholars, and software engineers to liberate ideas from their material
and formal contexts. As an extreme example, imagine discourse that could never
be separated from a specific medium. Communication would be difficult, if not
impossible! Moreover, deeply seated values in favor of free speech and the
unencumbered exchange of information depend on a loose coupling between
ontological categories. Our abilities to remix, translate, remediate, recycle,
transmit, transform, and transcend the ideas of others relies on their
ephemeral nature. Ideas deposited in ossified matter, in fixed shapes, do not
travel well. And there are plenty of "actors" that would like for culture to
return to the time of singular thought, etched in monolithic tablets, whether
made of stone or silicone.

But, the loose coupling of content to its underlying strata of form and matter
also comes at a cost. As surface phenomena, text hides the flows of power and
control coursing beneath. For now, the text remains if not "at hand," then "at
hand's length." But as books get smaller, "micrographic" writing moves closer
to the optic nerve: first as wearable technology (watches, glasses, pins), then
as ingestible particle (smart dust, nanobots), and finally as something coupled
directly with the nervous system and inscribed into the neural network of the
brain (as the ultimate hard- or rather wetware platform). The movement from
afar to within logically completes the program of "intellect augmentation"---a
program which begins not with Vannevar Bush, J.C.R. Licklider, and Douglas
Engelbart (who used the term extensively), and not with *Xerox*, the ultimate
purveyors of radical surface reading, but with the invention of writing itself.
Reading "for meaning," in these not at all futuristic conditions,[^ln4-reading]
involves turning hermeneutics into reverse engineering.
