<!-- When pursuing scholarly estrangement the author "lays bare" and "makes
obvious" the metaphor by drawing attention to its inner dynamics.-->

<!-- Metaphors, as Lakoff and Johnson famously argued, do more than
decorate---they structure everyday human activity. The metaphor shapes one
system of conceptual relationships in terms of another. In the authors'
example, the military image of "fortification defense" implies a conceptual
system structuring the "defense of an argument." When actually defending the
argument, a speaker guided by the metaphor acts in a way that resembles
combat. A different metaphor could suggest a less combative mode of engagement
between interlocutors [@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 3-14]. -->

Russian formalists of the early twentieth century understood estrangement as a
matter of everyday practice, beyond linguistic analysis. Shklovsky and his
fellow travellers were concerned more generally with the automatization of
human experience, a process by which metaphors lose their evocative power
through repeated use. Such metaphors for them became mere automatons that
convey meaning, no longer perceived, felt, or lived. According to Kantian
views on the free will, in vogue in Russia at the time, a reasoned being
should act with the assumption of personal autonomy, structuring one's own
experiences according to the principles of self-directed action. The
habituated metaphor instead guides action from without and furtively. It is
given rather than understood.  Estrangement emerges therefore finally as a
model of human liberation. It frees thought from the tyranny of automatism
[@shklovksy_sborniki_1917, @shklovsky_hod_1923, @boym_estrangement_1996,
@holquist_minding_2005]. By laying bare the mechanisms of the implicit
metaphor, we are thus able to recover agency lost to the blind mechanization
of thought. Through estrangement readers discover the principles that guide
action: free to accept some parts of the conceptual transference (the
intellectual field *is* "verdant"!) and to reject others (but let us not "use
combines" to "harvest" it).

<!-- Computation advances into everyday life though metaphor. Like all tropes, such
metaphors lose their evocative power with frequent use. The task of a literary
scholar becomes then to explicate and to renew the trope, in search for
parallelisms that, as George Lakoff and Mark Johnson explain, configure one
conceptual system in terms of another [@lakoff_metaphors_1980, 3-14]. Why do
we call some software programs "applications" for example? The application of
what to what? Apple's iconic *Human Interface Guidelines*, a manual of style
that heralded the era of "what you see is what you get" interfaces, contains
explicit echoes of Lakoff's thought. The manual urges the designer to "convey
meaning through representation" and to seek the metaphor appropriate to the
task [@apple_apple_1987, 11]. Do not ask the user to throw "documents" into
"jars," for example, the manual entreats: "dragging the document icon to the
Trash means the user wants to discard that document" [@apple_apple_1987, 229]
Simulated objects must "look like they do in real world" [@apple_apple_1987].
In the words of cognitive scientists John Carroll and John Thomas, whose work
the Apple design guidelines also reference extensively, "people employ
metaphors in learning about computer systems." Using the appropriate metaphors
therefore provides "wide-ranging improvements in learning ability and ease of
use" [@carroll_metaphor_1982, 108]. What users know about trashcans in the
real world can guide interactions with virtual trashcans.

The rapid uptake of "what you see is what you get" interfaces pioneered by
Apple proved the effectiveness of metaphor-centric design. Through metaphor,
users are able to extend models of action from one domain into another.
Empirical studies have later shown the effectiveness of metaphor in the design
of human-computer interfaces [@blackwell_does_1999; @sallam_use_2009]. Flusser
would say that such figurative habituation makes experience more "smooth." The
user avoids "bumping into the sharp corners" of new and complicated virtual
environments. The metaphor conserves mental energy. Once internalized, it also
no longer attracts attention. The seminal work on figurative speech undertaken
by the Russian formalists at the turn of the twentieth century reminds us that
effective metaphoric shortcuts to learning have their cognitive downside.
Habituated experience passes into the unconscious [@shklovksy_poetika_1919,
104]. The thing "dries up" in Shklovsky's words, first in perception and then
in practice [@shklovksy_poetika_1919, 38 and 104]. The figure becomes so
familiar that we cease thinking about it---an early insight that was also
confirmed experimentally almost a century later.[^ln-cog]

Early architects of human-computer interaction wrote their recommendations
with novice users in mind. The metaphor was supposed to ease the transition
into a virtual world. Once inside, the virtual inhabitant also began to
mistake metaphor for reality. The *Apple Design Guidelines* imply that
metaphor-based design would lead to learning and discovery. More than forty
years of computing under the guidelines have failed to produce a learned
public. This is evidenced by the frequent and urgent calls to digital literacy
on the part of our leading intellectuals, educators, and
politicians.[^ln-digitalliteracy] Instead of educating, the preference for
easy figurative tropes created shortcuts to knowledge. Once established, such
shortcuts continue to prevent users from literal engagement with computational
realities. Like Tolstoy's mindless dusting, life at the keyboard passes
without reflection. Worse yet, the trope obscures forces of capital,
governance, and control cloaked behind the innocuous figure. -->

Estrangement [*ostranenie*], sometimes also translated as "defamiliarization",
was the formalist answer to the ossified metaphor. Estrangement was meant to
recover the experience of the making of the thing, to name it, and to describe
it as if one encountered it for the first time [@shklovsky_voskreshenie_1914;
@shklovksy_sborniki_1917, 8]. The formalists found estrangement in art,
politics, and analysis alike [@jameson_prison-house_1972, 75-9;
@boym_estrangement_1996; @holquist_minding_2005]. In art, estrangement
proceeded through poetic experimentation: neologism, synecdoche, consonance,
or repetition, among other devices. Thus, the childlike incantation "a door
ajar" can evoke the etymological roots of the onomatopoeic "to jar" in the
sense of "to emit a harsh  sound"; the sense of the word as a vessel or a jar,
which comes from the Arabic *jarrah*; and to "ajar" which although relates to
the Old English *cyrr* or *cierr* in the meaning of "turn," as in "chore" or
"a turn of work", was in fact in the eighteenth century confused with jar in
the sense of "a harsh sound" to form the now rare "ajar" in the sense of "to
be in a jarring state; out of harmony; at odds; awry" [@_ajar_2015;
@_ajar_2015-1; @_jar_2015; @_jar_2015-1]. In this way the initial parallelism
between two usually unrelated words, a door and ajar, first creates a novel
analogy but then leads to renewed insight. Could the nonsensical *adoor* carry
the semantic weight of an adverb? Is it a chore to turn a jar? The
etymological play leads us to rediscover unexpected confluences in the words'
usage and origins.

Where estrangement in art could renew the word through suggestive, often
trans-rational [*zaum*] experience, in scholarly practice the formalists
adopted a scientific stance towards the object of their study. Unlike the
previous generation of critics who concentrated on the historical,
biographical, and philosophical aspects of literary formation, the formalists
wanted to reconstruct how the thing was made. For example, in his influential
essay on "How Gogol's *Overcoat* Was Made" Boris Eikhenbaum identified *skaz*,
or the manner of speaking, as an organizing principle for Gogol's satirical
narratives [@shklovksy_poetika_1919, 151-67]. What readers lost in having the
joke explained to them they gained in understanding of the genre.

In *Plain Text, I extend the formal concern with the mechanics of literary
"device" and "technique" to literary devices and technology proper. I too am
interested in how the literary thing is made. Computers, as I will argue
throughout, are essentially machines for universal symbolic manipulation. This
property makes them particularly suitable for figurative analysis, which aims
to explicate concepts involved in the making of the metaphor.[^ln-egturner]
Influenced by the tradition of formal literary exegesis in the work of
scholars like Boris Eikhenbaum, Franco Moretti, and Caroline Levine, my
overarching aim in *Plain Text* is therefore to expose the illusion of
verisimilitude between text on paper and the simulated text on a screen. The
words may look the same, but the underlying affordances of the medium differ
in significant detail. Consider for example a news report that alters its
content based on the reader's location. Imagine also an e-book reader that
highlights popular passages of a novel in real time, shortening the less
popular passages down to their algorithmically distilled summaries. For a
literary analyst, the instability of the digital medium means analysis cannot
be confined to reading for surface meaning alone. How can close reading
persist when reading devices reconfigure the text to fit individual tastes,
mood, or politics? How would we even agree on the fact that we are reading the
same text? The very possibility of interpretation comes into question.

I begin then where Bernard Harcourt's recent book on epistemic disobedience
ends: with the possibility of localized dissent [@harcourt_exposed:_2015].
Following itinerant theorists of the metaphor I propose to proceed by
systematic estrangement of computational metaphors; metaphors that fade into
transparency as if to escape the critical gaze. A strategy of deliberate
defamiliarization reclaims the metaphor-device for analysis. To come to terms
with the book as a device; to begin to understand the nature of the text
simulation; to perceive the particularity of the computed sign, these are the
aims of *Plain Text*.

<!-- cite also mignolo -->
