## Odds and Ends

> Il faut nous laver de la littérature. Nous voulons être hommes avant tout,
être humains. Il n'y a pas de formes ou de forme. Il n'y a que le
jaillissement de la vie [@artaud_uvres_1980, 204].

Lotman: "the material embodiment of a semiotic system." limited, hierarchical,
and structured [@lotman].  Derrida: "Everything is a text" .  TEI people: A
text is an "ordered hierarchy of content objects" [@derose]. Goodman and
Genette.

[@southall1988] "Visual Structure and the Transmission of Meaning" "Criteria
for resemblance between documents" 

foundational binaries in literary studies, namely: surface and depth, form and
content, immanence and transcendence, concrete and universal.

## History of Textuality

![Universal Turing machine as a device. Reconstructed by Mike Davey, circa
2012. Displayed in the Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments,
Harvard University. Go Ask A.L.I.C.E. Exhibition, 9/11-12/20/12. Photograph by
Rocky Acosta under CC Attribution 3.0 license.](images/half-turing.jpg)

### Infinity

See also @siegert_cacography_2011: "The step leading to from an analog,
infinite set of signals to a finite and limitable set of selectible signals."
Also Max Bense, Information Aesthetics.



### Scratch Collector

Metadata k Code and comments. Collector of chair or
collector of scratches. Object oriented ontology. Object oriented languages.
Competing paradigms: separation of code and data. No separation (Haskell).  ##
Form and Content in legal thought

When it comes to the of handbags, texts, and paintings the American legal
system grants at least four differing layers of protection. Utility patents
protect the "functional" aspects of an object. Design patents protect the
"ornamental" "look and appearance" aspects of jewelry, fashion, furniture,
beverage containers, and computer icons. Under the US Copyright Law, Section
102, copyright law protects "original works of authorship" that are "fixed in
any tangible medium of expression." Finally, the Lanham Act protects commercial
identity and distinguishes the source of commercial goods. 

Putting aside trademark law, Under the law the text cannot be a mere object. 

Language about physicality.

A derivative work is defined as "a work based upon one or more preexisting
works such as a translation, musical arrangement, dramatization,
fictionalization, motion picture version, sound recording, art reproduction,
abridgment, condensation, or any other form in which a work may be recast,
transformed, or adapted." 17 U.S.C. § 101.

Look at a case. Threshold of originality. "non-eligibility of "textual
matter""Ets-Hokin v. Skyy Spirits Inc. Although a label's "graphical
illustrations" are normally copyrightable, "textual matter" is not—at least not
unless the text "aid[s] or augment[s]" an accompanying graphical illustration. 

U.S. Code: Title 35 - PATENTS

 Article One, section 8, clause 8 of the U.S. Constitution which states:

    The Congress shall have power ... To promote the progress of science and
useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the
exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries; 

design patents protect intellectual property textbook [@merges]  

35 U.S. Code § 171 - Patents for designs

Whoever invents any new, original and ornamental design for an article of
manufacture may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions and
requirements of this title.  The provisions of this title relating to patents
for inventions shall apply to patents for designs, except as otherwise
provided.

@dumont @gorham-vs-white @egi-vs-swisa


The legal system "encodes" ideas of form and content. What is design? Confusion
in for Plato as well.

### Some old intro 

Athanasius Kircher's Universal Polygraphy George E. McCracken

Minimalism. Plain

Elegant Variation, Fowler

If you've never interacted with your computer through a text-based terminal,
understand for now that the command line is a sort of a call-and-response
dialog between you and your system. This way of interacting with computers
predates modern graphical user interfaces (GUIs) and is still commonly used by
professional programmers and system administrators.

More than an interface, the command line encapsulates a philosophy of
computing: write simple programs that do one thing well.

This philosophy contrasts sharply with alternative vision: where "things just
work," glossy visual interfaces. Surfaces and alienation. 

That computer interfaces entail politics is not an uncontroversial assumption
and one which will become central to the argument of my book.

Despite the ubiquity of Unix-like systems (which run a lion share of servers,
super-computers, Apple gadgets, and Android devices), the textual roots of
computing are obscured by visual

The battle for the soul of computing. Whether the internet empowers
participatory governance, deliberation, and dissent, or whether it ushers in a
new era of mass surveillance and centralized control depends crucially on which
of these two models of computing prevails.

> The machine is supplied with "tape" (the analogue of paper) The mechanization of type (media independence). With the invention of the
movable type and the typewriter the variability of hand-written script can be
normalized to a limited set of discrete characters. The process of
normalization continues today as contemporary approaches like natural language
processing and optical character recognition struggle to bring non-Western
writing systems under the umbrella of universal computability.

My short history of the distinction between form and content is necessarily
reductive. The situation on the ground was and continues to be more nuanced
than the dichotomy would suggest, with a number of reasonable positions between
extreme idealism and extreme materialism. It is enough however to give a sense
of what's at stake: not just a dry academic debate about the nature of art,
but the very capability of art (and don't necessarily think "high art" here) to
transform humanity. For Hegel, true art reaches for truth beyond visible forms,
transcending the deterministic material universe. The early formalists rejected
Hegel, emphasizing instead the text's outward formal properties as "devices"
capable of revitalizing stale metaphors and ossified ways of thinking.

### Images note used

![Universal Turing machine as a device. Reconstructed by Mike Davey, circa
2012. Displayed in the Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments,
Harvard University. Go Ask A.L.I.C.E. Exhibition, 9/11-12/20/212. Photograph by
Rocky Acosta under CC Attribution 3.0 license.](images/half-turing.jpg)

### Hegel Formal Universal



# Chapter 5: Control

## Odds and Ends from intro

Drawing from the discussion between philosophers Gerard Genette and Nelson
Goodman on the nature of textual copies, I take up "reading" from the
perspective of a copy machine, which "sees" pages as monolithic images. The
machine deconstruction unveils the crisis of authenticity related to the
plummeting costs of digital reproduction. The supposedly "dead" authors
continue to draw checks from copyrighted work. Legal fictions rise to veil the
emerging affordances of textual technology.

End with unmediated thought !!!

## Attunement

We could therefore transmit a sonata by playing a violin, as
sheet-music, on a vinyl disk, recorded on tape, or by using an illegal
peer-to-peer network. In each case, the information transmitted remains more
or less the same, depending on the quality of your violin playing, the
fidelity of your speakers, or the compression ratio of your digital encoding.
It would be wrong too to consider any of these sources as somehow primal, with
others being something like "mere copies" of the original. We could for
example, start by composing music on paper. Alternatively, we could first play
a piece of music and then transcribe it into musical notation. In an extreme
but perfectly plausible case, we could compose by magnetizing a length of
ferrous tape first, and only then play the violin to reproduce what we have
"written." The medium does not know anything about the message. The way in
which we store, access, and retrieve the encoded information is determined by
the medium, however. We are the ones being shaped by the media. I do mean this
rather literally: the stage directions for Krapp's Last Tape would be very
different were Krapp writing a diary, or browsing his online social networking
profile, or if he were to embed a memory chip in his brain that was able to
store and retrieve the same messages from his thirty-nine year-old self as the
tape-recorder. The actor's body would move differently in each of these
cases—his senses and his thought would be altered in many subtle ways,
depending on the channel of communication.


## Simulation

"But if thinking consists only in writing or speaking, why shouldn't a machine
do it? Could a machine be in pain" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 17]?
Could it have internal states? "It is a travesty of the truth to say: thinking
is an activity of our mind, as writing is an activity of the
hand" [@wittgenstein_philosophical_1974, 17].

Wittgenstein's conversations with Turing about the ways by which physical
states pass into the symbolic ones and the other way around, prefigure the
operation of the universal Turing machine. The Turing machine occupies exactly
the described ambiguous state between symbol and mechanism.

This line of questioning was certainly already familiar to those students of
Wittgenstein who attended his earlier lectures at Cambridge, and who
undoubtedly have participated in his reading-related thought experiments.
Wittgenstein's reading and calculating machines were meant to challenge the
very notions of reading and calculating.

Turing returned to the problem of machine and human intelligence explicitly
[@turing_computing_1950]. Here, Turing proposes to reformulate Wittgenstein's
original question (Can machines think?) into what he calls the "imitation
game." The format would surely please his former professor: three people---a
man, a woman, and an interrogator of either sex---would communicate by
teletype. The object of the game for the interrogator is to determine the
gender of the individual behind the screen. The object of the game for the
other two participants is to fool the interrogator. And here is the twist: the
part of one of the participants (not the interrogator) would be played by a
machine.

The question "Can a machine think?" becomes then, "Will the interrogator decide
wrongly as often when the game is played like this as he does when the game is
played between a man and a woman?" [@turing_computing_1950, 433]. The striking
transposition of the cognitive activity (thinking) into its functional
discursive equivalent (misrepresenting one's identity in writing) echoes
Wittgenstein's playful thought experiments. The machine that thinks is a
machine that tells tall-tales. On this view, a convincing imitation of thought
is thought. We would simply not be able to prove otherwise, without peeking
behind the teletype screen to see who or what is doing the typing. In that
sense, Turing returns to Wittgenstein's refusal to locate the mark of the
cognitive within any given organ or activity. Thought is simply that which
looks (sounds, reads) like thought---it is a game that we play, and a game that
could conceivably be played by other entities, mechanical or otherwise. For our
purposes, it is interesting to note that Turing's chat-bot does not simply
compute or calculate.  It is a literary machine. It does not just imitate human
logic or speech.  Instead, it imitates (performs!) fibbing. It is able to
imagine a fictional story about an alternative identity, and ultimately to
convince its reader of the story's veracity.

In the shift from the cognitive to the discursive, Turing follows the
trajectory of Wittgenstein's thought experimentation. Moreover, the game is
tinged with distinctly sexual overtones, and in the context of an
interrogation. It is a game in which winning means transgressing either one's
gender or one's species, all the while maintaining a straight face. The
proposed language game is not simply conversational, it is suspenseful and
subversive, having the force of a mystery, a detective novel, or a legal
drama. At one point of the essay Turing answers what he calls "the argument
from consciousness," quoting one Professor Jefferson in saying that it is not
"until a machine can write a sonnet or compose a concerto because of thoughts
and emotions felt, and not by the chance fall of symbols, could we agree that
machine equals brain---that is, not only write it but know that it had written
it. No mechanism could feel (and not merely artificially signal, an easy
contrivance) pleasure at its successes, grieve when its valves fuse, be warmed
by flattery, be made miserable by its mistakes, be charmed by sex, be angry or
depressed when it cannot get what it wants" [@turing_computing_1950, 446].

In response Turing scripts the following conversation: 

> Interrogator: In the first line of your sonnet which reads 'Shall I compare
thee to a summer's day' would not 'a spring day' do as well or better?

> Witness: It would not scan.

> Interrogator: How about 'a winter's day.' That
would scan all right.

> Witness: Yes, but nobody want to be compared to a
winter's day.

> Interrogator: Would you say Mr.  Pickwick reminded you of Christmas?

> Witness: In a way.

> Interrogator: Yet Christmas is a winter's day, and I do not think
Mr. Pickwick would mind the comparison.

> Witness: I don't think you're serious.
By a winter's day one means a typical winter's day, rather than a special one
like Christmas [@turing_computing_1950, 447].

Add Plato. Reading is proper internalization. Interpretation is the scanned
symbol + state of the machine.

Literature as imitation game == mimesis, simulation.

[^ln1-chinese]: This line is a likely source for John Searle's famous "Chinese
Room" experiment [@searle_minds_1980].

[^ln1-enigma]: See the enigmatic fragment on @wittgenstein_remarks_1978, 372.

Tie to the first two chapters. Easy multiplicity of documents.  Digitality as
something imposed from without or imposed on us! Because the book is different
it fucks with authenticity.

The possibility of text that reconfigures itself.


Although much of contemporary popular discourse on computation speaks the
language of disruption, the history of computational symbolism, of the sort I
am suggesting here, must be seen as an evolutionary trajectory.



## Engineering for Dissent

The vast machinery that brings literature to life hides from the reader's view.
Literature conceals. Even on the level of stylistics, writing well is meant to
evoke a sense of ease where it is usually the product of painstaking labor. Let
us hold on to that intuition for the duration of this chapter: writing conceals
labor.

