[^ln3-translate2]: "In our discussion of this text we have been using an
authoritative French translation of Plato, the one published by Guillaume Bude.
In the case of *Phaedrus*, the translation is by Leon Robin. We will continue to
refer to it, inserting Greek text in parenthesis [@derrida_dissemination_1981,
71]."

[^ln3-barthes]: "The work is a fragment of substance," he writes. The work is
"moderately symbolic" where text is "radically symbolic." The work "occupies
space of books," where the text is "a process of demonstration," "experienced
only in an activity of production." He writes also that "the Text cannot stop
(for example, on a library shelf); its constitutive movement is that of cutting
across (in particular, it can cut across the work, several works)"
[@barthes_work_1978, 156-7].

[^ln1-database]: In describing his Relational Calculus Expression for Metaphor
Generation Lawrence F. Young writes that the "key to this model is the
observation that any entity can be metaphorically associated with another
entity" [@young_metaphor_1987, 312].

[^ln1-brains]: For the first view see @putnam_minds_1960 and
@fodor_language_1975. For the second view see @deutsch_quantum_1985 and
@dyson_turings_2012.

[^ln1-caveat]: The institutional distinctions between software engineering and
computer science often hinge on the extent to which the discipline pays heed
to the physical limitations of computing. As usual the situation on the ground
is much more complicated, and the boundaries between software engineering and
computer science are fast eroding. Still, North American students often have
the choice to major in Computer Science or Software Engineering. It would not
be unusual for the one faculty to be located in the School for Liberal Arts
and Science and the other in the School of Engineering. Consider also the two
major professional organizations: Institute for Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) and Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). See
@glass_comparative_1992; @parnas_software_1999; @glass_analysis_2004;
@vessey_unified_2005.

[^ln1-ceruzzi]: See @ceruzzi_computing_2012, 11 who writes that "the modern
computer is a convergence of separate streams of information handling, each
with its own rich tradition of technological history." "One could add other
antecedents such as the development of radio, motion pictures, and
photography" [@ceruzzi_computing_2012, 11].

[^ln2-chomchom]: I make this connection with many caveats and with the
acknowledgement of the complexity involved. See for example Ch. 6-8 in
@hacking_why_1975; @waller_chomsky_1977; @green_bertrand_2007, 103-43.


