---
title: "Humanities and Social Sciences Junior Faculty Summer Research Support
Program (Application)"
author: Dennis Tenen

---

To Whom it May Concern:

I hereby request summer support in the amount of $3,000 to further progress on
my first book, entitled *Plain Text: Poetics of Human-Computer Interaction.*
The funds will be used to defray costs associated with research, copy editing,
and manuscript preparation.

# Overview

*Plain Text* occupies the space between literary theory and the digital
humanities, challenging received notions of digital being through the media
history of a singular file format (```.txt```).

Plain text is a file format and a frame of mind. A fundamental concept in the
development of computing, plain text stands in opposition to closed platforms,
rarefied knowledge, and black-box devices. Instead, it offers a vision of data
that is human-readable by design: portable, concise, and universal. This book
contains an argument for plain text. In doing so, it seeks to convene a
community interested in reflecting critically on the ideas, tools, and
practices that shape our daily encounter with computation. My argument starts
with foundational principles at the intersection of media theory and
information science. I ask: what is at stake in the difference between digital
and analog media?  What contains more information a novel or a block of wood?
What separates meaning, form, and formatting? How do pixels form into texts?
Where does data end and meta-data begin? To what extent media determine the
message? The formulation of these broadly theoretical concerns about the
poetics of human-computer interaction opens the way to a discussion about the
social impact of textual technology, as it relates to applied dynamics of
online agency, deliberation, consensus-making, and dissent.

A secondary aim of this volume is to convince computer "users" to view their
computational environments as a literary system of sorts. I mean a "literary
system" in opposition to what one might conventionally mistake for a "binary"
or "digital" one, however imprecise those terms are in everyday use. In
clarifying usage, I will ask mere "users" to become close readers, thinkers,
and makers of technology, able to apply the same critical acuity to reading
code and platform as they do to close reading of prose and poetry. Ultimately,
the book makes a case for the recovery of textual roots latent in the
mechanisms of modern computing.

# Field Significance

The book aims to redress a weakness in the field of Digital Humanities,
particularly as it relates to literary studies. Much scholarship in this space
is often criticized for being ahistorical or atheoretical, abandoning the deep
traditions of literary theory and criticism, even where such traditions would
help bolster the case for emerging scholarship. The nominally related field of
New Media Studies has the opposite problem. Although theoretically
sophisticated, it sometimes produces research far removed from the actual
practice of creating new media (the archetypal example given by Katherine
Hayles is one of a contemporary photography critic not familiar with the use of
the "layers" tool in Photoshop). By contrast, I situate *Plain Text* at the
intersection of theory and practice: somewhere between "technical literacy for
new media studies" and "philosophical bases for computing in the humanities."

# Current Status & Proposed Work Plan

At the moment of writing this application the manuscript stands at 40,000 words
with roughly three chapters completed in their draft form, with two more at the
initial research and outline stage.

During the summer, I plan to revise extensively, send chapters out for feedback
from colleagues in the field, and to begin cleaning up the scholarly apparatus
(footnotes and illustrations).

# Budget Rationale

I propose to use the funding as follows:

1. $1,500 to offset expenses associated with hiring a part-time graduate
student assistant, at the rate of 10hr/week at $25/hr (6 weeks).

2. $1,500 for professional copy editing and manuscript-preparation services.
