## Odds and Ends

### Infinity
See also @siegert_cacography_2011: "The step leading to from an analog, infinite set of signals to a finite and
limitable set of selectible signals." Also Max Bense, Information Aesthetics.

### Text

Lotman: "the material embodiment of a semiotic system." limited, hierarchical,
and structured [@lotman].  Derrida: "Everything is a text" .  TEI people: A
text is an "ordered hierarchy of content objects" [@derose]. Goodman and
Genette.

[@southall1988] "Visual Structure and the Transmission of Meaning" "Criteria
for resemblance between documents" 

Drucker "the totalizing drive of the digital [@drucker2001, 145]."


### Scratch Collector

Metadata k Code and comments. Collector of chair or
collector of scratches. Object oriented ontology. Object oriented languages.
Competing paradigms: separation of code and data. No separation (Haskell).  ##
Form and Content in legal thought

When it comes to the of handbags, texts, and paintings the American legal
system grants at least four differing layers of protection. Utility patents
protect the "functional" aspects of an object. Design patents protect the
"ornamental" "look and appearance" aspects of jewelry, fashion, furniture,
beverage containers, and computer icons. Under the US Copyright Law, Section
102, copyright law protects "original works of authorship" that are "fixed in
any tangible medium of expression." Finally, the Lanham Act protects commercial
identity and distinguishes the source of commercial goods. 

Putting aside trademark law, Under the law the text cannot be a mere object. 

Language about physicality.

A derivative work is defined as "a work based upon one or more preexisting
works such as a translation, musical arrangement, dramatization,
fictionalization, motion picture version, sound recording, art reproduction,
abridgment, condensation, or any other form in which a work may be recast,
transformed, or adapted." 17 U.S.C. § 101.

Look at a case. Threshold of originality. "non-eligibility of "textual
matter""Ets-Hokin v. Skyy Spirits Inc. Although a label's "graphical
illustrations" are normally copyrightable, "textual matter" is not—at least not
unless the text "aid[s] or augment[s]" an accompanying graphical illustration. 

U.S. Code: Title 35 - PATENTS

 Article One, section 8, clause 8 of the U.S. Constitution which states:

    The Congress shall have power ... To promote the progress of science and
useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the
exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries; 

design patents protect intellectual property textbook [@merges]  

35 U.S. Code § 171 - Patents for designs

Whoever invents any new, original and ornamental design for an article of
manufacture may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the conditions and
requirements of this title.  The provisions of this title relating to patents
for inventions shall apply to patents for designs, except as otherwise
provided.

@dumont @gorham-vs-white @egi-vs-swisa


The legal system "encodes" ideas of form and content. What is design? Confusion
in for Plato as well.

### Some old intro 

Athanasius Kircher's Universal Polygraphy George E. McCracken

Minimalism. Plain

Elegant Variation, Fowler

If you've never interacted with your computer through a text-based terminal,
understand for now that the command line is a sort of a call-and-response
dialog between you and your system. This way of interacting with computers
predates modern graphical user interfaces (GUIs) and is still commonly used by
professional programmers and system administrators.

More than an interface, the command line encapsulates a philosophy of
computing: write simple programs that do one thing well.

This philosophy contrasts sharply with alternative vision: where "things just
work," glossy visual interfaces. Surfaces and alienation. 

That computer interfaces entail politics is not an uncontroversial assumption
and one which will become central to the argument of my book.

Despite the ubiquity of Unix-like systems (which run a lion share of servers,
super-computers, Apple gadgets, and Android devices), the textual roots of
computing are obscured by visual

The battle for the soul of computing. Whether the internet empowers
participatory governance, deliberation, and dissent, or whether it ushers in a
new era of mass surveillance and centralized control depends crucially on which
of these two models of computing prevails.

> The machine is supplied with "tape" (the analogue of paper) The mechanization of type (media independence). With the invention of the
movable type and the typewriter the variability of hand-written script can be
normalized to a limited set of discrete characters. The process of
normalization continues today as contemporary approaches like natural language
processing and optical character recognition struggle to bring non-Western
writing systems under the umbrella of universal computability.

My short history of the distinction between form and content is necessarily
reductive. The situation on the ground was and continues to be more nuanced
than the dichotomy would suggest, with a number of reasonable positions between
extreme idealism and extreme materialism. It is enough however to give a sense
of what's at stake: not just a dry academic debate about the nature of art,
but the very capability of art (and don't necessarily think "high art" here) to
transform humanity. For Hegel, true art reaches for truth beyond visible forms,
transcending the deterministic material universe. The early formalists rejected
Hegel, emphasizing instead the text's outward formal properties as "devices"
capable of revitalizing stale metaphors and ossified ways of thinking.
### Images note used

![Universal Turing machine as a device. Reconstructed by Mike Davey, circa
2012. Displayed in the Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments,
Harvard University. Go Ask A.L.I.C.E. Exhibition, 9/11-12/20/212. Photograph by
Rocky Acosta under CC Attribution 3.0 license.](images/half-turing.jpg)

### Hegel Formal Universal

Several lines in Hegel's own exposition on Plato's idealism give us a glimpse
of his struggle with the Platonic concept of form. In his "Lectures on
Philosophy," he writes: "The Idea is nothing but what is current with us under
the name of the Universal, when this word is not taken in the sense of *formal*
Universal [*formell Allgemeine*]." The formal universal for him is "merely a
poperty of things," whereas Plato is concerned with the "implicitly" universal
(as contrasted with explicitly, or formally universal). This internal "essence"
and "in-and-for-itself existent" alone can claim to truth. Hegel also warns the
reader against understanding the implicit universal in he sense of an
epistemological category, in the way "felines" would be a category uniting all
indivudual species of cats. Hegel writes: "We translate the Greek word *eidos*
by 'genus' or 'species',"  but when "genus" or "species" are "seized as a
number of similar determinations collected by reflection from several
individuals, to serve as a *mark* for the convenience of the understanding,
then we have the Universal in quite an external [superficial] form
[hegel_philosophy_1870, 250]." In other words, as soon as the universal is
marked [



For Hegel, the formal universal functions as an indeterminate mediator between
the ideal and the material worlds, combining it properties of both the ideal
and the material. It is found in the form of a thing, like a chair, for
example, which although an abstracted structure, still nevertheless belongs to
the chair as a physical property. The true idea of a "genus" or "species," in
the very taxonomic category of "chairs," does not and cannot belong to any
given chair as a property, according to Hegel. Instead, the ideal determines
all real-world members of its "genus." The formal ideal has a bit of both shape
and category, being at the same time an "idea" and a "physical property." The
"formal universal" mediates between matter and spirit. When we think of
Shakespeare's *Hamlet*, for example, whatever is meant by "the form" of the
play belongs neither to its material substance (pixel or paper) nor to the
ideational content of the work. The "formal universal" (or simply form) lies
somewhere in-between the two worlds: it is in the shape of the letters, in the
structure of the narrative, and in the prosody of the word. The form in that
sense is indeterminate, because we do not quite know which of these elements
belong to the content of the play and which are the contingent material
artifacts of the printing process: the way the fonts look, for example or the
way lines break on the page. Some matters of form matter to us as readers (line
breaks), and others do not (font kerning).

Elsewhere, Hegel gives perhaps the paradigmatic expression to the dichotomy
between form and content in the literature on aesthetics. In his *Lectures on
Aesthetics*, Hegel posits classical art as striving to reach an equilibrium
between its ideational, spiritual content and "the configuration of sensuous
material [@hegel_hegels_1998, 70]." Whole books have been written on Hegel's
rather technical and sometimes idiosyncratic vocabulary. Rather than define
terms precisely, Hegel likes to bombard his reader with semantic cognates. On
the side of "content" (*Inhalt*, *Gehalt*), he evokes words like inner life
(*Innere Lebendigkeit*), feeling (*Empfindung*), soul (*Seele*), and spirit
(*Geist*). All of these convey a movement inward and a location beyond the
physical world, accessible only to the spirit (*Geist*) or mind (*Gedanken*,
*Verstand*). On the side of "form" (same in German), Hegel accumulates words
like expression (*Ausdruck*), presentation (*Darstellung*), but also lines,
curves, surfaces, carvings, colors, tones, word sounds, and generally matter or
material (*Linien*, *Krümmungen*, *Flächen*, *Aushöhlungen*, *Farben*, *Tönen*,
*Wortklängen*, *Material*) [@hegel_werke:_1986, *Einleitung*]. The semantic
cluster related to "forms" conveys physical (palpable, of this world) and
outward-facing properties, available for examination to the senses (*Sinne*).


