---
title: "Humanities and Social Sciences Junior Faculty Summer Research Support Program (Revised Application)"
author: Dennis Tenen
geometry: margin=1.5in
---

To Whom it May Concern:

I hereby request summer support in the amount of $3,000 to further progress on
my first book, entitled *Plain Text: The Poetics of Human-Computer
Interaction.* The funds will be used to defray costs associated with research,
copy editing, and manuscript preparation.

## Theme and Argument

Plain text is a file format containing nothing but a "pure sequence of
character codes." In technical terms, it stands in opposition to *fancy text*:
"text representation consisting of plain text plus added information."[^ln-uni]
The book unfolds a history of and an argument for plain text. In making my
case, I argue that "other information" routinely embedded in all forms of
contemporary textuality includes much more than instructions for "font size"
and "paragraph justification." Increasingly, devices that mediate literary
activity encode specific models of governance and control.

The central concern of the book is to dispel the illusion of verisimilitude
between text on paper and text on the screen. The words may look the same, but
the underlying material affordances of the medium differ in significant
details. As an obvious example, consider a news report that changes slightly
based on the reader's location; or an e-book reader device that highlights
popular passages. For a literary scholar, such instability of medium means analysis
cannot be confined to reading for meaning alone. How will close reading
persist, when the reading device reconfigures a text dynamically: to fit
individual taste, mood, or politics?  The formulation of this narrowly
literary-theoretical concern opens the way to the broader question of empowered
human--computer interaction. Textual legibility, as I will argue, is crucial
to a critical understanding of what it means to remain human in a digital
world.

[^ln-uni]: The Unicode Consortium. *The Unicode Standard: Worldwide Character
Encoding*, Version 1.0, Volume 1. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1990.

The book is structured along a trajectory that begins at the material
foundations of modern textual technology, moving from the level of circuit and
silicon, and reaching up, through levels of abstraction (files, folders, and
operating systems), towards the reader. In following that path, I reconstruct
the passage of an electron from the mechanical action of the keyboard, to
magnetic storage medium, and to liquid crystal, that together give rise to
pixels, letters, and words. In using this approach, my book introduces a method
of literary microanalysis. Where distant reading perceives patterns across
large-scale literary copora, microanalysis breaks textuality down to its minute
constituent components. It is at this level, that I find that readers and
writers are in danger of becoming fundamentally alienated from the immediate
material contexts of knowledge production.

## Abridged Chapter Descriptions

### Chapter 1: We Have Always Been Digital

Discourse around the digital humanities needs a robust sense of the digital.
My first chapter begins with popular intuitions about the "look and feel" of
digital aesthetics. Here, I find that sometimes, the adjective carries the
connotation of "discrete," while at other times, it is used to mean something
more fluid and continuous, past the point of human perception. A discussion of
Liquid Crystal Display technology (LCD) flows into a section that deals with
digital representation from the perspective of analytic philosophy and through
the aesthetics of Nelson Goodman. My summary of that tradition reveals that
language and text are already in some sense "born digital," that is
"reproducible" and "differentiated" throughout. The chapter makes extensive use
of case studies from the history of early twentieth century telegraphy, to
illustrate the concluding discussion on the nature of binary and plain text
formats, in a distinction that supersedes the dichotomy between analog and
digital media.

### Chapter 2: Literature Down to the Pixel

Having established the grounds for digital textuality in the history of
character encoding, I begin the work of moving from "low-level" first-order
concepts such as "text" and "code" up to second-order concepts such as "file,"
"folder," and "document." The chapter starts by developing a theory of
"microanalysis," the closest possible kind of reading that pays attention to
the material contexts of knowledge production. Unlike scholars in the
Foucauldian tradition (who often trace the machinations of power through
discourse, on the level of representation), I concentrate my analysis on
mechanisms of control at the material roots of literary practice.  In
presenting a media history through primary sources on early development of
Turing machines, I show the explicit admixture of content and code: one meant
to communicate messages to humans and the other to program universal machines.

### Chapter 3: Laying Bare the Device

The chapter begins by outlining a recent discussion on surface reading. I ask:
What lies beneath the text? The question leads into a discussion about the
differences between form and content: two theoretical concepts crucial to
understanding the structure of plain text and binary file formats. I find that,
going back to Plato and Hegel, "form" was at times used to indicate physical
structure and at other times to indicate immaterial categories in the ideal
realm. A case study in removable storage (like ticker tape and floppy disks)
elucidates the movement of text from human-legible inscription on page (and
punch card) to a magnetic inscription (in the form of electrical charge)
invisible to the naked human eye. The case study unfolds the distinction
between print (in which matter, form, and content lie flat) and screen (where
the three layers occupy physically distinct media, providing only the illusion
of flattened textuality). The discussion concludes with a stark image, visually
illustrating the difference between plain text and binary formats. To produce
the image, I inject malicious code into an Adobe Acrobat file (`.pdf`), showing
the contrast between surface text and its underlying magnetically bound bit
structure.

### Chapter 4: Media are Not the Message

In this chapter I make two significant interventions in media studies and
literary theory. First, I argue that media should not be confused with
messages. Starting with the (sometimes oversimplified) legacy of Marshall
McLuhan, I examine several related models of communication, including ones
proposed by semioticians (Charles Sanders Peirce, Ferdinand de Saussure, Roman
Jakobson), engineers (Harry Nyquist, Claude Shannon), and animal
anthropologists (Jakob von Uexk√ºll, Gregory Bateson, and Thomas Sebok).
Corresponding to the mediating role of "form" in the previous chapters, I find
that the "mode" of the written communication act does something akin to
"attuning" the reader (receiver) to the encoding of the message (and to the
corresponding cultural techniques of apprehension). At the center of the
chapter is a case study based on a real-world text "written" by a troupe of
Sulawesi macaques as part of an art project at Britain's Paignton Zoo. (The
text was subsequently published under the title *Notes towards the Complete
Works of Shakespeare*, Vivaria Press, 2002.)

### Chapter 5: Recursive Encounters with Oneself

This chapter begins with a close reading of Beckett's *Krapp's Last Tape*. The
title character makes yearly audio recordings of himself, only to revisit them
and to enter into a sort of a dialog with his own voice from the past. I posit
this encounter with the archive as Krapp's "media being" and suggest that such
encounters are commonplace, through similar practices of depositing "snapshots"
of one's consciousness into files, bookshelves, and folders. Sartre's idea of
an "appointment with oneself" helps to see this external structure of files,
folders, and library furniture as cognitive extension, in need of delicate
pruning and arrangement. Documents, in this light, are shown to exist not as
completed works, but as "vectors" that mutate and move through time and space.
Building on the communication models described in the last chapter, I ask: What
is being externalized, communicated, and preserved?  And answer: It is not
simply a message, but the subject itself.

## Field Significance

The book seeks to redress a weakness in the field of digital humanities,
particularly at the point of its relevance to literary studies. Scholarship at
the intersection of these two fields is sometimes criticized for being
ahistorical or atheoretical, abandoning deep traditions of literary theory and
criticism, even where such traditions would help bolster the case for the
digital humanities. The nominally related field of new media studies has the
opposite problem. Although theoretically sophisticated, it sometimes produces
research far removed from the actual practice of creating new media (the
archetypal example given by Katherine Hayles is that of a contemporary
photography critic not familiar with the use of the "layers" tool in
Photoshop). By contrast, I situate "Plain Text" at the intersection of theory
and practice: somewhere between "technical literacy for new media studies" and
"philosophical bases for computing in the humanities."

## Schedule to Completion and Budget Rationale

As it stands, Chapters 1-3 are completed (in their draft stage). I will be
actively pursuing readers and respondents for these chapters. I propose to use
the summer funds to advance research and to aid in manuscript preparation for
the next two chapters: Chapter 4, "Media are Not the Message" and Chapter 5,
"Recursive Encounters."

The projected budget is as follows:

1. $1,500 to offset expenses associated with hiring a part-time graduate
student assistant, at the rate of 10hr/week at $25/hr (6 weeks).

2. $1,500 for professional copy editing and manuscript-preparation services,
which include securing the rights (where needed) for some 15-20 images (tables
and diagrams) that are needed to illustrate some of my more technical passages.
