Fading Words: A Media History of a Disappearance

This paper explores the paradox of digital text, which the reader encounters
in its ephemeral form on the screen and then once again, in its enduring form,
at the site of the archive, the hard drive. In the 1990s a group of media
theorists and textual scholars foregrounded reading at the surface of the
screen, which despite the solid appearances, constitutes an animated,
stroboscopic, and ultimately impermanent medium of inscription. In response to
the emphasis on digital ephemera, the next decade of scholarship saw studies
that insisted on the weighty materiality of electronic media. Reading began to
engage the morphology of rare metals, media archeology, hard drive forensics.
Both accounts, I argue, capture an aspect of the same underlying condition.
The perceived image of an archived inscription splits from its source. The
sign plausibly resides both on the screen and on the hard drive. It splits, in
some real a sense, diverging at the site its projection from the site of the
archive. Erasing an inscription on the screen, for example, may not elicit the
corresponding action on the disk. Using archival materials from the history of
telegraphy in the late nineteenth and early- to mid- twentieth centuries, I
chart the gradual fracture and the ultimate illegibility of the computational
sign. Early computers stored human-readable text and machine instruction at
the surface of the same storage media like punch cards and ticker tape.
Although difficult to read, these forms of machine writing were readily
visible and therefore amenable to analysis. The advent of magnetic storage
forced the composite inscription into an opaque medium. Unable to perceive
magnetic polarities without the aid of a machine, readers often manipulated
text blindly. In this way a typist would type several sentences without seeing
the printed output. The paper identifies a milestone in the history of human
textuality: the moment at which the inscription passes from view, giving rise
to the sometimes conflicting but nevertheless consistent accounts of digital
text.
