Laminate Text: Material Contexts of Digital Knowledge Production
Dennis Yi Tenen

Digital text,  at the basis of all computer-mediated epistemological activity,
appears to view at once an ephemeral and enduring phenomenon. It is, as Wendy
Hui Kyong Chun wrote, an "enduringly ephemeral" inscription that "create[es]
unforeseen degenerative links between humans and machines."[^1] At the site of
its projection, on "soft" screens, the text shimmers and wanes, suspended in
liquid crystal, in response to the modulation of an electric signal. At the
site of its storage, on "hard" drives, among "floating gates" and
ferromagnetic polarities, the text adheres to recondite surfaces persistently.
There, it multiplies and obstinately spreads, like silicon dust, filling the
available crevices with stored data, far beyond the immediate contexts of
inscription.

This inherent duplicity of electromagnetic inscription, as I argue here,
results in conflicting critical accounts in the scholarly literature.
Furthermore, it engender a fundamental alienation from the material contexts
of digital knowledge production. The alienation ultimately threatens critical
disempowerment. In this essay, I outline a condition I name *laminate
textuality*, but which an inscription fractures to occupy multiple surfaces
concurrently. A historical archaeology of electromagnetic writing anchors the
more theoretical portion of the essay within the emerging affordances of
computational media, which take place, in part, at quantum scale, beyond the
reach of humans senses. Clandestine forces of capital and control subsequently
contest such newly found microscopic expanses, thus limiting the scope of
possible interpretive activity.


[^1]: Chun, "Enduring Ephemeral," 148.


